Rapper AKA, real name Kiernan Forbes, split from his business partner Prince “Costinyo” Nyembe after reportedly discovering that he had spent the company’s money on buying a Maserati, Sunday World has reported.
The aftermath of the split saw the media company Beam Group shut down officially in September, but AKA says the he was informed that some of its members have been rehired by a new company operating on the same premises. The company has been confirmed to be Nyembe’s under the new name The Brand Space Africa.
Some of these staff members have allegedly not received full salaries since AKA walked away.
Nyembe is believed to have purchased a Maserati Grancabrio worth R1 million, leading to the breakdown of the business and his relationship with AKA. He has denied buying the car through the company, also saying that reports that the company owes Sars R2 million are not true.
“I used to own a Maserati, but no, it was under my name. I don’t own it anymore because I just decided to sell it,” he told Sunday World.
AKA is the majority shareholder of the failed company, owning 70 percent.
READ MORE: Is AKA copying Bonang?
“I have stated in numerous internal company correspondences that as a 70% share owner, I take ownership of whatever debt might have been incurred not for company purposes,” Forbes said.
“But what I will not do is incur debt on personal expenses of any other share partners that were incurred not for company purposes,” he added.
AKA also told Sunday World that he noted “with sadness” that employees had not been paid their salaries since his departure, but added that since the work was done not for Beam Group but for a new company he was not a part of, there was nothing he could do.
When Beam Group closed, AKA, in a now deleted tweet, gave a reason that revealed no clues as to the problems that were facing the business.
“I actually realised that you don’t need a company when you yourself are the business”, he said at the time.
Following the closure of the business, he has launched an app and is now reportedly working on an autobiography.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.