Four suspects have been arrested for attempted car hijacking and police confiscated two firearms and explosives, Free State police said today.
It is alleged that on Wednesday, two suspects went to a house in Phiritona, Heilbron were they found the victim cleaning his garage together with his son.
The suspects entered the garage and pointed the victim and his son with firearms demanding keys to his Quantum kombi. The victim complied and gave them the keys.
“The two suspects took off with the Quantum and the victim’s son. On their way out of Phiritona location they picked up two other suspects and went en-route to Zamdela,” said police in statement.
The Tactical Response Team together with other units within the Zamdela Cluster were alerted and the suspects were quickly encircled.
The police said the suspects noticed that they did not have a way out and they drove into Amelia section where they abandoned the vehicle and fled on foot. The police gave chase and through the assistance of the community who pointed out where suspects were hiding, the police managed to arrest all four suspects.
The victim’s son was found in the kombi unharmed.
“The quick response by TRT and Zamdela units prevented the commission of a more serious crime, as it is possible that those explosives and firearms were to be used in a heist, armed robbery, ATM bombing etc. We will continue to squeeze the space for criminals and ensure that they are brought to book,” police said.
The four suspects will appear at the Sasolburg Magistrate Court on Friday on the charges of hijacking, possession of unlicensed firearms and ammunition and illegal possession of explosives.
On Wednesday, police minister Bheki Cele told parliament’s portfolio committee on police that police were dealing with so-called “feeder crimes”, pointing out, amongst others, car hijacking, car theft, and illegal firearms were feeder crimes to cash heists.
– African News Agency (ANA) 
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.