The likelihood of stage one load shedding remains high for Sunday evening from 5pm to 9pm, but will only be implemented if “absolutely necessary”, state-owned power utility Eskom said.
“While the prognosis is high, load shedding will only be implemented as a last resort when all other emergency reserves have been exhausted. Should load shedding occur, it will continue on a rotational basis and will be implemented across the country. Customers are reminded to treat all electrical points as live during this period,” Eskom said in a statement.
Earlier, the utility said the full recovery of the power system would take about 10 days to recover from the effects of the strike by trade unions over wages, once all staff returned to work on Monday.
Level one load shedding required 1000MW to be shed nation-wide. Load shedding was conducted as a measure of last resort to protect the power system from a total collapse or blackout, Eskom said.
“While safety of employees remains our first priority, recovery teams at our power stations continue to work hard to stabilise the power system and to return our generation plant as quick as possible.”
The estimated 10-day prognosis for full restoration was due to the effects of the industrial action which interrupted continuous processes at power plants. These processes had to be cleared out and restarted, which would take additional time.
These included coal management and transportation, “for example the inability to transport coal from our coal stock yards to our coal bunkers due to the absence of operating staff”. In addition, the already low coal stockpiles at some stations were exacerbated by road closures as coal delivery had to be suspended.
“[Also a], significant increase in plant outages and a bottleneck in routine maintenance due to the lack of resources to optimally operate the plant, such as ash clearing and mechanical failures that occurred during the period. For example smaller stations can only return units more or less every 24 hours due to demineralised water limitations and some stations that are operating at high output have to manage their ash levels to achieve optimal productions. These stations are expected to only return to normality by Thursday,” Eskom said.
In addition, Eskom was currently managing diesel levels at peaking plants at 50 percent to ensure that sufficient diesel generation was available for emergencies.
“While the restoration could be completed earlier, increase in production and full stability can only increase and be achieved with the return of employees on Monday. We will continue to re-assess our prognosis during the week,” Eskom said.
“We thank residents and businesses for using electricity sparingly during this period. Please switch off geysers during the day especially during peak periods [7am to 10am and 6pm to 9pm], as well as all non-essential lighting and electricity appliances to assist in reducing demand. Remember to treat all electrical points as live during a power outage,” Eskom said.
Customers were advised to keep checking their load shedding schedules on the Eskom and municipal websites and plan on the assumption that load shedding would take place.
For Eskom customers, these schedules were available on the Eskom website (loadshedding.eskom.co.za). Eskom customers could also contact the customer contact centre at 0860-037-566.
– African News Agency (ANA)