Crestbrook in Brookdale was a scene of chaos recently, as police and the occupants of a suspicious vehicle were involved in an exchange of gunfire, Phoenix Sun reports.
An eight-year-old child was allegedly struck in the wrist by a stray bullet in the crossfire.
READ MORE: Pensioner caught in PMB taxi war crossfire: ‘We saw bullets flying past us’
On Sunday at 12.10pm, members of Phoenix SAPS were patrolling the Crestbrook area, Brookdale, when they noticed a suspicious White Hyundai Accent vehicle with four occupants.
Sgt. Mzindle and his crew tried to stop the vehicle, which fled at a high speed. The members then gave chase. The occupants of the Hyundai started shooting at the SAPS members.
SAPS then retaliated and called for backup. They were assisted by Constable Brian Vikilahle and his crew, who then managed to apprehend one of the suspects.
The other three suspects managed to get away. The 36-year-old suspect was detained at Phoenix SAPS.
He was later charged for being in possession of property suspected to be stolen. The suspected stolen vehicle was entered in the station register for further investigation.
During the shootout between the suspects and the police, an eight-year-old boy was playing outside when he was allegedly struck by a stray bullet in the wrist.
The child was rushed to the Unit 10 clinic, and later transferred to Mahatma Gandhi Hospital, where he received treatment.
A witness who identified himself as Wassem said: “The car came speeding down along Crestbrook with the police chasing behind. A second police vehicle came down Crestbrook in the other direction. When the Hyundai noticed the second police vehicle, they tried to turn down Shorebrook Road.”
He added: “The driver must have lost control because the Hyundai crashed straight into a fence. The shooting started from the circle and continued all the way [until it crashed] at Shorebrook.”
The hastily repaired fence the Hyundai was lodged in.
Phoenix SAPS spokesperson Captain Louise Naidoo said: “Two cases of attempted murder were opened, and added to the current charge of possession of property suspected to be stolen. One suspect was arrested. Investigations are ongoing.”
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.