A MyCiTi bus driver has been hailed for his honesty after reuniting a Cape Town woman with her purse that contained valuable items, including her diamond wedding ring.
Bus driver Siphelo Maqubela became Sea Point resident Sharon Russak’s hero after finding and returning her purse that contained her diamond wedding ring, earrings, as well as cash, credit cards, her driver’s licence and her identity document.
In a statement, the City of Cape Town said: “Mrs Russak had accidentally dropped her purse when she got out of her car on Main Road in Sea Point at about 5pm on Monday 11 June 2018. Mr Maqubela, who was on duty driving the 108 route from Hout Bay along Sea Point Main Road to the CBD, noticed the purse lying on the ground next to a parked car.”
Maqubela stopped the bus and picked up the purse, and continued with his route.
“When I eventually opened the purse and saw the jewellery, I actually became scared. I knew I had to return it to the owner. I don’t have Facebook so I asked one of my passengers to try and find Sharon on Facebook using her name from the ID. The passenger then messaged her via Facebook to let her know that I found her purse and to give her my cell number,” Maqubela said.
Russak had not yet noticed that her purse was missing until she received the message.
“After my appointment, I saw a Facebook message to please contact someone with regard to my purse. At first, I thought maybe I was somehow pick-pocketed because how could a bus driver have my purse,” Russak said.
Russak’s husband Steve contacted Maqubela and arranged to meet at a MyCiTi bus stop in Camps Bay, as Maqubela was making his way back to Hout Bay.
“He returned the full contents of my purse, but most importantly my diamond wedding ring, another ring and valuable earrings, which are of sentimental value to me. Siphelo, thank you, thank you and bless you for your honesty. You are a credit to MyCiTi and you have restored my faith that there are good, honest people out there,” said Russak.
Maqubela received a certificate of gratitude from the City for his act.
City of Cape Town MMC for transport and urban development Brett Herron said: “This certificate is a token of our appreciation for being an outstanding ambassador for MyCiTi. You have gone the extra mile, and we commend you for your honesty, integrity and your efforts in reuniting Mrs Russak with her belongings. You are an asset to our team.”
At the handover of the certificate, Russak said her husband was initially upset when he heard that she had lost her purse, as it contained her wedding ring, to which Maqubela jokingly replied: “Yes, I saved the marriage.”
The father of two said he appreciated the certificate. “I like to help people. I always ensure that I return people’s belongings to them, and that is what we are taught here at MyCiTi. I love my job because I love driving. Our passengers need to believe in MyCiTi. They need to know they can trust us,” said Maqubela.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.