Forensic pathologist Dr Reggie Perumal took the stand on Tuesday as the trial of Jason Rohde for the alleged murder of his wife continues.



The prosecution was quick to call the witness’ credibility into question, producing a 2016 judgment that referred to Perumal’s evidence as speculative.
This is not Perumal’s first appearance in a high-profile murder trial; he was also hired by the defence of Paralympian Oscar Pistorius.
The expert testified on issues including the alcohol content in the bloodstream of the deceased, Susan Rohde.
Under cross-examination from the prosecution, Perumal was forced to admit he is not a medical microbiologist.
Prosecutor Louis van Niekerk produced a judgment delivered by the High Court in Durban in 2016. The judgment was made in an appeal for a drunk-driving case, where the forensic pathologist’s testimony was dismissed.






“Dr Perumal confirmed that he is not a medical microbiologist. He is not registered as a microbiologist with the [Health Professions Council of South Africa].”
“Under cross-examination‚ he conceded that he is not an expert in the field of microbiology‚ but that he merely based his experience in dealing with drunken-driving suspects when he was a district surgeon between 1983 and 1994. In short‚ his evidence on the expiry of the blood kit was based largely on speculation.”
This is not the first witness brought by the defence who has had their testimony and credibility questioned.
Last week, it was reported that Dr Larissa Panieri-Peter, who was hired by Rohde’s defence team, was dismissed from court by Judge Gayaat Salie-Hlophe and her testimony declared inadmissible.
READ MORE: Psychiatrist gives secret information in Jason Rohde trial
The forensic psychiatrist’s report and testimony about the conclusions she came to after examining Susan Rohde’s mental state were discounted.
“Indeed the report is objectionable in many respects. I have repeatedly expressed concerns and reservations during her testimony. Her report repeats evidence already placed before court, and goes far beyond scope, expertise and role of the witness,” said a visibly angry Salie-Hlophe.
“In fact, it went about to use the function and role of court, whose role it is to determine whether Susan’s death was a suicide or homicide. No court acting reasonably would abdicate this responsibility,” she continued.
“The report also makes mention of anonymous persons and evidence already before court. This report and expert testimony of [Panieri-Peter’s] is no more than regurgitating testimonies already placed before this court,” Salie-Hlophe said.
READ MORE: Forensic expert picks holes in Susan Rohde autopsy report
“Simply put, I perceive that this evidence and report by this witness is nothing more than an attempt by the defence to get a second bite at the cherry. Further examination is not allowed, and accordingly this witness would be excused.”
In response, Rohde’s advocate, Graham van der Spuy, slammed the judge’s decision. “It is highly prejudicial to the accused, there is not a jot of justification, and the trial has been contaminated as a result.”
Former CEO of property company Lew Geffen-Sothebys Jason Rohde is accused of strangling his wife and staging her suicide. She was found hanged with an electrical cord from a hook behind the bathroom door of the hotel room they shared.
Rohde has been adamant that, rather than being murdered, his wife committed suicide after finding out about an extramarital affair Rohde had been having with his colleague, Jolene Alterskye.





The property mogul’s fate could come down to the forensic evidence presented in this trial.








For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.