The national leadership of the ANC Youth League wants young blood to be elected into leadership positions at the upcoming elective conferences in Limpopo, Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal, but in at least one province, this call seems to have been scuppered by the leading candidate’s scandals. 
Yesterday, Limpopo ANC Youth League secretary Che Selane said South Africa has the potential to grow the economy and fight the scourge of unemployment to participate fully in the mainstream economy. 
“But we cannot win the battle against joblessness and poverty because only old-aged people were in leadership positions. What do we expect from them because they have reached a carrying capacity, and can no longer discharge their full potential,” said Selane. 
“If we truly want to take this country forward, we need to advise our old-age leaders to resign and relinquish power to the young, energetic and intellects, who grew in the ranks of the youth league to lead the movement. 
“So we are appealing for ANC branches to nominate young people who know the politics of the ANC inside out to be elected in the upcoming provincial elective conferences,” he said. 
Selane’s call for young blood comes just a week after league president Collen Maine accused ANC provincial leaders in all provinces of recycling themselves in key positions in every party elective conference, and accused ANC leaders of making provincial structures their “old-age home”. 
But Limpopo’s deputy speaker, Lehlogonolo Masoga, who is a former ANC Youth League provincial chairperson, may have become the latest statistic of young people who miss chances of leading the movement because of bad behaviour. 
The ANC in Limpopo is set to hold its provincial elective conference from June 22, and he has the overwhelming support of young people in the province’s five regions – Peter Mokaba, Mopani, Vhembe, Sekhukhune and Waterberg – to topple Nocks Seabi as the new provincial secretary. 
But with only a fortnight to go before the conference, Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane has recommended that he pays back R125 000, allegedly spent on an exorbitant telephone bill and pornographic movies, while on a month-long official trip to the US in 2014. 
The case was first reported by the Economic Freedom Fighters to the public protector in 2015, after the legislature failed to act against Masoga, and taxpayers footed the bill. 
Mkhwebane gave Masoga 60 working days to pay back the money or face the law. 
Yesterday, the EFF came down hard on Masoga. 
“Masoga is a leader with a high libido and cannot be a role model to our children,” said the EFF Limpopo provincial secretary, Jossey Butane. “He must pay back the whole amount, which was spent on satisfying his uncontrollable libido.” 
The Democratic Alliance was equally perturbed about Masoga’s massive bill. DA provincial chairperson Jacques Smalle said Masoga must be charged for gross unethical behaviour. 
Smalle said the DA would write to the speaker of the legislature, Polly Boshielo, to ensure that the public protector’s decision on Masoga is implemented without delay or favour. 
Attempts to solicit comment from Masoga hit a brick wall, as his phone continuously rang unanswered. Masoga also didn’t respond to text messages sent to his cellphone. 
– alexm@citizen.co.za
ALSO READ: Limpopo deputy speaker must pay back R125k ‘porn’ phone bill – Mkhwebane
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.