Jacob Zuma has not filed his application for a review of the charges against him by late yesterday afternoon and his legal team will have to explain why in the KwaZulu-Natal High Court in Durban today. 
That’s the word from National Prosecuting Authority spokesperson Luvuyo Mfaku , who told The Citizen he was expecting a postponement today. 
“I anticipate there will be a request for a postponement. The matter was postponed for them to lodge a review application. 
“We have not received papers from them so they must address the court in terms of why they have not filed, and what they intend to do going forward.” 
Zuma’s legal team was supposed to have filed his application for a review of the charges against him by May 15. 
It is believed he may still try to bring an application to challenge NPA head Shaun Abrahams’ decision not to accept his representations and allow the criminal case against him to proceed. 
Zuma’s lawyer had reportedly not been able to appoint his legal A team of Kemp J Kemp and Gani Hussein – who represented him at his first appearance in April – owing to a dispute over who would be paying his legal fees for the trial. 
In May, President Cyril Ramaphosa filed a notice to abide by what the High Court in Pretoria decides on the application brought by the DA to stop Zuma being supported by the state attorney – and by extension taxpayers. 
This pending decision is also likely to feature in today’s application for a postponement in the matter, with which senior deputy director of public prosecutions advocate Billy Downer has already indicated he is ready to proceed. 
According to the detailed charge sheet, Zuma faces racketeering, corruption, money laundering, fraud, and tax evasion charges relating to 783 payments made to – or on his behalf – by his erstwhile financial manager, Schabir Shaik. 
The payments were made during Zuma’s rise to president, from when he was KwaZulu-Natal MEC, deputy president of the ANC and deputy president of South Africa. 
Shaik was jailed for 15 years for corruption. He was subsequently released on “medical parole”.
ALSO READ: Zuma reportedly fires his advocates over payment issues
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.