Celebrity model and TV presenter Shashi Naidoo has taken to social media to issue the latest in a series of apologies for comments about Israel that landed her in hot water on social media.
In a statement that should be lauded for its honesty, if nothing else, Naidoo said: “I stupidly copied and pasted the response verbatim in a feeble attempt to appear smart on social media without reading it comprehensibly (I know), thereby entering an issue of world importance I had no real fundamental understanding of – my biggest mistake.”
“I reached out to a friend to help articulate a response and offer a secondary point of view, as to be honest, I didn’t know much about the situation (although it sure must have looked otherwise),” she continued, adding: “Words will never be enough to express how truly sorry I am. It will be in my actions going forward that I do better.”
The 37-year old, TV presenter, actress, television presenter, model, MC, entrepreneur and fashion blogger was blasted for being “extremely uninformed” after expressing her views on Israel and Palestine on Instagram, in defence of DJ Black Coffee’s decision to tour in Israel.






WATCH: Shashi Naidoo’s tearful apology about Gaza ‘s**thole’ comments
Since the incident, Naidoo has apologised publicly several times, including in a tearful video clip that you can watch here:






In an earlier statement, Naidoo said: “I am extremely sorry for the statements I have made, unfortunately my comments came from very little knowledge of the political standing as I am not a political figure or even follow politics.”
As a result of her initial Instagram comment, Naidoo was dropped from her role as ambassador of Glampalm Africa and for modelling for jewellery designer Adila Dhorat.
The social media outrage is believed to have been started by social activist Yusuf Abramjee, formerly of 702 and Lead SA.
Abramjee took to Twitter to take Naidoo to task over her tweets, and later to voice his disapproval with her apology as well, which he described as “completely wrong”.





It is with great humility that I step forward and not only accept, but again, sincerely and deeply apologise to all that I offended and hurt for my post in regard to the humanitarian crisis in Gaza, and my lack of understanding in my initial apology to the Muslim community. This should of been to the Palestinian people in the first instance, and broader society as a whole. I apologise unconditionally, but I would also like to this opportunity to explain what happened with regard to my recent Instagram posts. I posted a picture with a DJ recently in Ibiza and the post attracted commentary from another Instagram user because he had played in Israel. In what I believed was defense of him, I reached out to a friend to help articulate a response and offer a secondary point of view, as to be honest, I didn’t know much about the situation (although it sure must have looked otherwise). I stupidly copied and pasted the response verbatim in a feeble attempt to appear smart on social media without reading it comprehensibly (I know), thereby entering an issue of world importance, I had no real fundamental understanding of – my biggest mistake. There is no spin. This is the truth. I expressed his worldview as my own, and for that I will forever live with the consequences. I agree with the commentary that it not only highlighted my ignorance on the issue and the way it was handled, but also made me seem uncaring and indifferent to the suffering of any human on this planet. I in no way wish to make excuses or expect people to forgive me at this time. I messed up. I know that, and I take full accountability. All that I hope to achieve is to convey that I am sincerely sorry, and in a way thank every one who called me out, as I have learnt from this. No matter what ones beliefs are, there is always room for empathy and compassion. The last couple of days have shown me that there is a larger education that I need to undertake on issues facing humanity. I have read the commentary and will further not only educate, but re-educate myself . Words will never be enough to express how truly sorry I am. It will be in my actions going forward that I do better.
A post shared by  Shashi Naidoo (@shashinaidoo) on Jun 18, 2018 at 11:08pm PDT








For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.