Notorious business forums known as ‘tender mafias’ have been bullying their way around the Dolphin Coast, now interrupting fibre installations in the Ballito/Salt Rock area, North Coast Courier reports.
Edge Telecoms, a company that has been installing fibreoptic cables in the Dolphin Coast, were forced to abandon their work almost a month ago after a business forum threatened physical violence against their workers.
READ MORE: City of Cape Town’s fibre optic network passes the 800km mark
Trenches dug in anticipation of the cables have since been left abandoned, and are an eyesore around town.
Trenches have since been left abandoned and are an eyesore around town.
Edge Telecoms regional manager Joey Maharaj told the North Coast Courier that the company had to take time out to negotiate with the business forum, whose name he was unsure of. He said that work would resume by this week.
“Many companies are dealing with this problem, and we felt it best to sort out the issue in a peaceful manner. I was happy that there was no form of physical violence and that our staff understood and cooperated with the forum members.
“Now that we have discussed our position with them, we will be resuming work and it should be complete in a few weeks.”
The internet connectivity company was not the only business to fall prey to threats from business forums who demand a piece of the pie in large projects in the district.
Two weeks ago, contractors working on the extension of a residential estate were forced to flee after four members who allegedly belonged to the Delangokubona Business Forum threatened to shoot them. The forum has denied these allegations,
In the same week, another business was chased off-site by a taxi load of tender mafia members.
They have now stopped operating with their company vehicles in a plea to avoid intimidation.
Ilembe Chamber of Commerce and Industry’s Cobus Oelofse told the Courier this problem was not unique to the Dolphin Coast.
Recently, a R2.4 billion project developed by millionaire Vivian Reddy was brought to a standstill for almost two weeks by Delangokubona members.
For the past few years the forum, and a few others have also been at the forefront of demanding tender projects from KwaDukuza municipality, Ethekwini Metro and Sanral.
Two years ago, Delangokubona Business Forum and 10 other forums landed themselves in court after Tongaat Hulett Developments, Vumani Civils CC, WK Construction SA and Water Bles Investments were granted interim interdicts to stop them from threatening, intimidating or harassing their construction workers around the new Sibaya Precinct development at Umdloti.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.