The traditional leader of Bakgatla Ba Kgafela in Moruleng outside Rustenburg, Kgosi Nyalala Pilane, today denied claims that the traditional council was not consulted on deals signed with several companies.
Testifying at the Maluleke Commission, Kgosi Nyalala denied claims that deals were signed off without a traditional council resolution.
He referred to the Sibanye Gold and Siyanda Resources transactions, which the traditional council alleged they had no previous information on.
“It is not correct what they have indicated to the commission. In relation to the two transactions referred to there was a lot of consultations towards the final decision taken before transactions… I remember in particular the shareholders agreement with the traditional council in relation to Siyanda and Sibanye. This was in respect of the Swartklip mine. There were two members who were against signing the agreement.,”  he said.
He also refuted claims that he and deputy chairperson of the traditional council Kagiso Pilane were the sole people making decisions in the expenditure of Bakgatla.
He said the decisions were made with the participation of the traditional council members and other officials.
“I was not involved in the daily administrations of the transactions. There were CFOs  [chief financial officer] and managers assigned for duties. They dealt with transactions and reported back to the traditional council.”
He said the responsibility of the traditional council receiving documents on certain transactions rested with officials.
“It was the responsibility of the CFO and the CEO to ensure that records were provided to the traditional council. It was their duty and it was the right of the council to receive the records,” he said.
The commission heard from previous evidence that Kgosi Nyalala “ran the show” in Bakgatla business.
The Traditional Council had previously made claims that there were often no consultations over resolutions. But Nyalala said regarding transactions he was involved in, communities to the core were involved in decision-making.
He said in the transaction relating to share holding at Anglo Platinum, the deal was discussed long before the current traditional council.
Bakgatla had 15 percent shareholding in the Union Section Mine of Anglo Platinum and Anglo Platinum retained the remaining 85 percent.
He said he was not aware that villagers were asking questions such as who gave authorisation to negotiate and sell the mine.
“The head of clans, headmen, the royal family and the traditional council were told of the sale. The new traditional council was provided with reports and processes of the transaction. Even records in the form of minutes have been submitted to the commission. Each village is represented by a head of clans who reports back to them, so it is impossible that they would ask such questions.”
The Maluleke Commission is holding public hearings at the Rustenburg Civic Center. The commission is investigating the chieftaincy of Bakgatla Ba Kgafela in Moruleng.
– African News Agency (ANA)
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.