Here’s how the Springboks fared in a gritty win in the second Test against England in Bloemfontein.
15 – WILLIE LE ROUX (6/10)
Didn’t see much ball in general but the pleasing thing about his growth is that he’s becoming far less individualistic. Showed good tactical awareness and hands in the second half.
14 – S’BU NKOSI (5/10)
One the whole brought down back to earth a bit following his stellar debut last week. Conceded two penalties and missed the vital tackle in England’s second try but recovered well after the turnaround.
13 – LUKHANYO AM (6/10)
He said he wanted to be more involved this week without being too fancy and the Sharks midfielder backed up his words with deeds. Carried the ball impressively at times and tackled with heart.
12 – DAMIAN DE ALLENDE (5/10)
Such a frustrating player. Good awareness for the intercept that stopped a promising England attack in its tracks and an effective ball-carrier in general. But he lacks other value-adding skills such as good distribution and varied decision-making. Poor ball protection too in contact but his defence has improved.
11 – APHIWE DYANTYI (6/10)
Growing all the time. He had limited opportunities on attack but his work ethic is undeniable. That’s what you want from an international winger.
10 – HANDRE POLLARD (6/10)
He still hasn’t reach significant heights but his calmness as a decision-maker is really impressive. Kicked beautifully from hand and the tee.
9 – FAF DE KLERK (6/10)
His instinctive nature got the better of him initially as he kicked poorly, threw wild passes and conceded a needless off-side penalty in the first few minutes. But this nippy halfback has grown massively in the last year and it’s allowed him to deal with setbacks far more easily. He was composed in control for the majority of the game.
8 – DUANE VERMEULEN (8/10)
Simply immense. Showed brute strength and vision in exploiting the gap for his try, completed nine tackles and proved a nuisance at the breakdowns. It’s good to have him back.
7 – PIETER-STEPH DU TOIT (7/10)
He is such an all-round presence, whether as defender, ball-carrier or lineout option. Does tend to become a bit overeager in the defensive line, which can put the rest of the formation under pressure.
6 – SIYA KOLISI (7/10)
Kept the emotions of his players in check after a few niggly moments and contributed well in general. One of the best defenders on the field. Attacking opportunities limited again but those will come … and it will be a sight to behold.
5 – FRANCO MOSTERT (7/10)
Truly one of the unsung heroes of this pack of forwards. The amount of work he gets done is amazing, even if one doesn’t always see it. Nine tackles, four lineout wins and six carries attest to a fine day at the office. His intervention in preventing a try from Brad Shields was vital.
4 – RG SNYMAN (6/10)
His hands let him down a couple of times but he was robust in the collisions and a valuable lineout option, especially in trying to contest on England’s throws.
3 – FRANS MALHERBE (5/10)
This position continues to be a bit of a problem for the Boks. Malherbe looked rusty throughout and had some technical issues at the scrum. There was one monster tackle though.
2 – BONGI MBONAMBI (7/10)
Really coming into his own as a ball-carrier and is steadily regaining match fitness. Not asked to tackle too much, but when he did, the hits were dominant.
1 – BEAST MTAWARIRA (7/10)
As always a stabilising force at scrum time but his work rate was much better than at Ellis Park. Great vision to set up Vermeulen’s crucial score.
16 – AKKER VAN DER MERWE (6/10)
His best Test to date. Gritty on defence and a crucial turnover when he ripped away possession from Johnny May.
17 – STEVEN KITSHOFF (7/10)
Truly the heir to Beast’s throne when he eventually moves on. Dynamic in all facets when he came on.
18 – THOMAS DU TOIT (6/10)
Played his part in suddenly helping the Boks dominate the scrums. Deserves a start at Newlands surely.
19 – JEAN-LUC DU PREEZ (6/10)
Far more involved after a lukewarm showing in Johannesburg, particular in showing his willingness to be a ball-carrier.
20 – SIKHUMBUZO NOTSHE
Not enough time on the field for a fair rating.
21 – IVAN VAN ZYL
Not enough time on the field for a fair rating.
22 –  JESSE KRIEL (5/10)
He didn’t exactly have much to work with on attack but did little wrong.
23 – WARRICK GELANT
An unused substitute.