In an effort to replace the City of Johannesburg’s ageing fire engine fleet, four new fire engines were delivered to Emergency Management Services (EMS) yesterday, Randburg Sun reports.
The fire engines were delivered to the Florida Fire Station on June 13 and handed over by Executive Mayor Herman Mashaba, acting EMS chief Mhlengi Makhubalo and public safety MMC Michael Sun.
READ MORE: City of Joburg cancels corrupt R161m fire engine contract, says Mashaba
Sun said two fire engines were newly purchased and that two had undergone a full overhaul, bringing them up to a standard that is “as good as new”.
Executive Mayor Herman Mashaba hands over four new fire engines to Joburg’s Emergency Management Services. Photo: Enoch Lehung/City of Johannesburg
Florida, Lawley, Ivory Park and Eldorado Park fire stations now each have a new fire engine. Earlier this year, new fire engines were also delivered to Fairview, Jabulani and Cosmo City fire stations.
Sun said residents of Johannesburg had over the years raised concerns about the City’s ability to secure their safety in the event of an increased number of fire outbreaks.
“I can happily assure residents that through the procurement and possession of these fire engines, the department of public safety will ensure that the City is able to alleviate much of the pressure that has been placed on our Emergency Management Services,” he said.
“Acquiring these fire engines forms part of the City’s commitment to build safe communities and therefore a safer city.”
Before these fire engines were acquired, the City had only about 30 vehicles, which was about one fire engine per station. Most of these vehicles were, however, beyond repair, and could only manage to make one emergency trip before breaking down.
A new fire engine can be in service for up to a year without needing repairs.
The City also opened a new station in March, the Cosmo City Fire Station and an additional 91 firefighters were deployed.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.