Freedom Under Law (FUL) has instructed its lawyers to write to the national director of public prosecutions, Shaun Abrahams, seeking clarity as to the presence of Nomgcobo Jiba, deputy director of public prosecutions currently on special leave, at the offices of the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA). 
This follows reports that Jiba has visited the NPA’s offices on at least two occasions in the past six months. 
“If true, Jiba’s attendance at the NPA’s offices would be in clear violation of an order of North Gauteng High Court delivered in December 2017,” FUL says in a statement.
“The Court held that the decision taken by Abrahams to withdraw charges of fraud and perjury against Jiba was irrational and was to be set aside. 
“It also found that the failure by then President Zuma not to suspend and institute inquiries into the fitness of Jiba and special director of public prosecutions Lawrence Mrwebi was irrational and that it should be set aside.

Mindful of the importance of public confidence in the NPA as a law enforcement agency, the Court held that “the continued presence of such high profile officers in their positions under the current circumstances, even for one day longer, should not be countenanced.” 
“For this reason, and faced with the privileged access Abrahams had granted the pair when placing them on special leave, the Court devised a specific order prohibiting Jiba and Mrwebi – pending the prosecution to finality of appeals – from performing any function relating to their offices in the NPA and from presenting themselves to the NPA offices and/or engaging in any discussion concerning any pending cases under consideration by the NPA,” FUL says.

“That Jiba is now reported to have visited the NPA’s headquarters in Pretoria twice over the past six months, so flouting the Court’s order, only serves to underline her unfitness for any role within the NPA, let alone that of key official.
“But that this happens with Abrahams still at the helm of the NPA, even without reference to his past history of granting Jiba special concessions, is a reminder to the South African public and our president of the importance of restoring integrity and professionalism to this beleaguered institution. 
“And this requires urgent change to its top leadership.”
ALSO READ: Afriforum’s Gerrie Nel to pursue private prosecution against Jiba
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.