Here’s how the Springboks fared in a thrilling first Test against England at Ellis Park.
15 – WILLIE LE ROUX (7/10)
Pretty much at his attacking best in this game and, crucially, has now become a real team player that creates opportunities for others next to him. Backed his pace at the right moment for his try.
14 – S’BU NKOSI (8/10)
This young man is the complete package … and that’s no over-exaggeration. He showed pace, power and nifty skill for his tries but also made 10 tackles, one of them dominant – even if he was exposed initially. A star has been born.
13 – LUKHANYO AM (3/10)
What a disappointing night for the Sharks lynchpin. He was, frankly, nowhere. He made no tackles and his one good run was cut short when he somehow had possession ripped from him.
12 – DAMIAN DE ALLENDE (5/10)
Well, his power with ball in hand is impressive but there’s no variety. Doesn’t distribute or create play. Defended decently.
11 – APHIWE DYANTYI (6/10)
Not quite as shiny as his wing partner but this man’s got talent too. Struggled to assert himself initially and threw away a potential try with a wild backhand pass. But his basketball touch for Nkosi’s second try was magical and eventually found his feet as a tackler too.
10 – HANDRE POLLARD (6/10)
Pretty poor as a defender, especially in the first half. Yet his ability to attack the gainline and spot gaps makes him a superb general on attack. Kicked well in general but needs to slot pressure kicks.
9 – FAF DE KLERK (8/10)
Magnificent return to Test rugby. Nippy service, smart vision when taking on the line and guts as a defender. He’s matured visibly in English rugby.
8 – DUANE VERMEULEN (7/10)
What a bolter to have in your pack of forwards. Vermeulen’s calmness allows his younger teammates to go full-out. The creaking body can’t quite dominate collisions anymore but his was secure under the high ball and made forced two penalties at ruck time.
7 – JEAN-LUC DU PREEZ (4/10)
He attacks the rucks with gusto but his hands are sometimes too hard and he strangely didn’t perform as ball-carrier. Silly penalty at the start immediately put the Boks under pressure.
6 – SIYA KOLISI (6/10)
The man’s a leader, of that’s there’s no doubt. But being a first-time captain at this level does affect your personal game initially. Didn’t quite find his groove as a ball-carrier but he defended well. Conceded two offside penalties that led to England’s fourth try.
5 – FRANCO MOSTERT (6/10)
Played like the man we know. Underrated, he did the donkey work all day whilst the others caught the shine. 10 tackles attests to his work rate.
4 – RG SNYMAN (7/10)
If he can sometimes just stop himself from throwing fancy but wayward off-loads, this giant can become a great. He was a huge presence as ball-carrier and tackled superbly. The go-to guy at the lineouts and made the steal that secured victory for his side.
3 – WILCO LOUW (4/10)
If he doesn’t get his basics at the scrums right – and he struggled initially – the Stormers man isn’t dynamic enough to be a modern Test tighthead. Will need to contribute more in general play.
2 – BONGI MBONAMBI (6/10)
For a man who’s played a pitiful amount of rugby this year due to illness, he certainly delivered a decent performance. Imagine if he’s match-fit!
1 – BEAST MTAWARIRA (5/10)
Seemed stuck in second gear in general but didn’t do much wrong.
16 – AKKER VAN DER MERWE (6/10)
Conceded a penalty and didn’t get much attacking opportunities but made his presence felt as defender.
17 – STEVEN KITSHOFF (7/10)
Did his part to kick-start the Springbok scrum and bustling in general play. Such a valuable asset to have.
18 – THOMAS DU TOIT (6/10)
Less flamboyant than Kitshoff but far more dynamic than Louw. Gave the Boks’ scrum some oomph.
19 – PIETER-STEPH DU TOIT (5/10)
Came on at a stage where the Springboks started to lose a bit of momentum, yet played his part as a stout defender.
20 – SIKHUMBUZO NOTSHE
Not enough time to be rated fairly.
21 – IVAN VAN ZYL (6/10)
The polar opposite of De Klerk in terms of excitement but he enhanced his reputation as South Africa’s best defensive organiser at scrumhalf.
22 – ELTON JANTJIES
Not enough time to be rated fairly.
23 – WARRICK GELANT (5/10)

Pleasingly showed that he has decent kicking boot but his opportunities were limited in general.