Memorial and funeral arrangements for the top police officer who was killed in a horrific accident last Thursday are under way, Mpumalanga News reports.
Major-General Nhlamvu Elias Dlamini, of Pienaar Cluster, died on June 7 during a car crash on the Schoemanskloof Road. The accident claimed the lives of two drivers from both vehicles. “We are still busy with the preparations for Dlamini’s funeral arrangements. The accident is still under investigation,” said police spokesperson Brigadier Leonard Hlathi on Monday morning.
READ MORE: Cop killed, others robbed of guns in Mpumalanga business robbery
Provincial commissioner Lieutenant-General Mondli Zuma has sent condolences to the deceased’s family.
He praised Dlamini for his commitment and selflessness during his long stay in the SAPS.
“He was a combatant that was readily available to carry out any task given to him by the SAPS, an organisation he dearly loved,” Zuma said.
The late major-general served in many environments during his career within SAPS, which include serving in both the uniform and detective environments in Vosloorus before moving to the then District Commandant Germiston as a public relations officer, and later, the then East Rand’s area commissioner’s office as a communications officer.
Dlamini came to Mpumalanga as a director responsible for crime prevention, and has been moving from office to office serving as an area commissioner of the then Lowveld Area, Kanyamazane station commissioner, cluster commander of Pienaar, Witbank, as well as acting as a provincial head of the Hawks in Gauteng.
“General Dlamini, the soft-spoken leader, was not just a police officer, but [also] well-qualified, in that he had a national diploma as well as BTech degree, both in policing. Members who had worked with him described him not only as a commander, but also as a warm person and a father figure, who was always ready to impart knowledge and guidance, as well as motivation,” Zuma added.
Zuma indicated the loss of Dlamini had left a void in the hearts of many, both in the police and the community. He sent his heartfelt condolences to the family.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.