Tshwane mayor Solly Msimanga and Democractic Alliance leader Mmusi Maimane were chased away by an angry community in Ga-Rankuwa, north of Pretoria, during what was supposed to be a site visit to a small business and job creation project.
Police were called to escort the two DA leaders out of the hall as angry residents hurled insults at them.
Community members say they are dissatisfied with the service delivery rendered by the DA administration, complaining about the sewage system that has not been working properly for a number of years. Some residents even came forward with buckets full of faeces to show the mayor what they are forced to endure every day.
“We’ve been pleading with the mayor to come and address our grievance, but no, he comes here to see 25 people out of the entire community…that’s not fair, they come to us when they need votes and neglect us as soon as they are elected,” said resident Mduduzi Mopai.
DA Provincial Leader John Moodey and Tshwane Mayor Solly Msimanga are being escorted by police from the Ga-Rankuwa Arts and Crafts Centre where they visited alongside DA leader Mmusi Maimane to speak to some of the beneficiaries at the centre. Angry community members interrupted their meeting wanting to be addressed by the mayor regarding service delivery issues, 12 June 2018, Ga-Rankuwa, Pretoria. Picture: Jacques Nelles
Mopai said he has been a staying in a shack in Zone 14 with no electricity and running water for five years, and Msimanga has been promising to come and hold a meeting with them but has failed to do so.
“We are not undermining the mayor’s visit, but then what else must we do to get his attention. We also need his attention.”
Angered community members are seen reacting to a police car leaving the Ga-Rankuwa Arts and Crafts centre where Tshwane Mayor, Solly Msimanga and DA leader Mmusi Maimane visited to engage with the young people who have been given an opportunity through the FabLab Programme, 12 June 2018, Ga-Rankuwa, Pretoria. Picture: Jacques Nelles
Msimanga said they have been meaning to come and address residents on their issues but had been blocked every time they attempt to engage with residents.
“You have people who are genuinely saying engage with us, but while you are still engaging there’s another group that comes and says we don’t want you here,” he said.
“How am I supposed to hear the community’s concerns and address their concerns when you have people that are willing to ensure you don’t come and address them,” said Msimanga.
The mayor said he is committed to delivering services and plans to return to the community of Ga-Rankuwa in two weeks.
– African News Agency (ANA)
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.