London – Diakali is an interesting proposition as he turns his hand to fences in the netbet.co.uk Novices’ Chase at Fontwell. Rated as high as 158 over hurdles when with Willie Mullins, Diakali is now in the care of Gary Moore and has had two unsuccessful starts over hurdles for his new team.
He has raced a bit keenly on both occasions and failed to get home, so perhaps he can fare a little better if running with more restraint in this new sphere.
Pouvoir Magique will probably go off at skinny odds in the Lookers Handicap at Newcastle, but he is hard to oppose in what appears to be a Royal Ascot warm-up today.


John Gosden’s charge has been limited to just one start so far this term, but the form of that Newbury win looks pre y decent as he was chased home by Victoria Cup winner RippOrf. Fourth placed Zwayyan also turned in a good effort to finish second at Nottingham last week, making Pouvoir Magique’s 3kg hike in the handicap even more justifiable, particularly given the relative ease of his victory.
While he switches back to the all-weather here, this Le Havre gelding won on the Tapeta at the back-end of last year and this race must surely be intended as another confidence boost before the Royal Hunt Cup in a couple of weeks’ time.


Alfie Solomons was a bit green on his debut at Newbury but can step forward for that run in the British Stallion Studs EBF Novice Stakes. He tried to do it the hard way on his first attempt, but was not really geared up for a battle when push came to shove. The experience should not be lost on him though and this looks like a slightly easier opportunity.
Light Of Joy impressed when winning at Leicester on her return and can follow up in the Pin Point Recruitment Fillies’ Handicap. David Lanigan’s charge counts Shiva and Light Shift among her relatives and she clearly has a bit of ability herself, albeit certainly not of their calibre. Weather Front is the one to follow for Karen McLintock in the NCS Group Ltd Handicap after a decent second at Leicester last time. – Press Association




Geoff Lester’s top UK bets:
Fontwell Race 2: 2 CORONET Fontwell Race 6: 5 KESSAAR Fontwell Jackpot: R72
(Leg 1 Race 4) – 4, 5 x 1, 2, 6, 9 x 1, 2, 6 x 2, 3, 5








Would you like to place a bet
on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.