The JB Marks municipality in North West must investigate the incomplete construction of the R45.5 million Sarafina Stadium in Ikgageng near Potchefstroom, the provincial legislature portfolio committee on local government and human settlement said today.
Committee chairperson Motlalepula Rosho said the committee discovered that the project was far from completion and facilities mentioned on the municipal report were not available except one toilet.
“The sports facility is completely vandalised and there is no value for money hence we want MPAC [Municipal Public Accounts Committee] to urgently conduct an investigation into this project.
“Monies were paid to service providers for shoddy work especially Dolly construction. The investigation must reveal the exact amount paid for the project and whether there is value for money. We need to know which procurement processes were followed when appointing these service providers,” she said.
Mayor Kgotso Khumalo admitted in the meeting that service providers where paid R30,2 million for an incomplete Sarafina Stadium project.
The portfolio committee had a paid an oversight visit to the stadium two days before the meeting.
According to the technical director at the municipality, Benji Zungu, the multi-year tender was for the upgrading of the Sarafina Stadium which included the construction of a guard house, gym, courts for tennis, basketball, netball and volleyball, ablution block, pedestrian lane, swimming pool, caretaker accommodation and irrigation system.
“In the 2016/17 municipal financial year and after several engagements with the initial service provider, Dolly Construction/Kemisetso (J/V), the contract was terminated after slow progress and non-performance and the companies were paid R9,9m.
“Khoisan Roads CC was then appointed to finish the project and it was completed in September 2017 and paid R17,2 million,” said Zungu.
He said there had always been a confusion among some members of the community regarding the naming of the project – ‘The upgrading of Sarafina Stadium’ which should be named ‘The upgrading of Sarafina Sports Facilities”.
Rosho said the municipality should also investigate the ghost payments and present a report before council and to the committee.
“We also want a detailed report on the incomplete road construction projects such a Appledraai road, and other roads that were allegedly reported to have been paid while there was no proof of work done, this must also cover projects in Ventersdorp. We want a summary of how the municipality will fix these projects that compromise service delivery,” she said.
– African News Agency (ANA)
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.