Dear Apple,
I know we have been through a lot together.
For 10 years I have been loyal to you, but I have made a difficult decision. I think it’s time for me to start seeing other forms of technology.
I’m sorry, Apple. But it’s not me, it’s you.
There’s the decline in your quality.
The planned obsolescence.
The cables that cost thousands of rands to replace, but break as regularly as the cheaper cords your competition make.
The new releases, that send your superfans into a frenzy, but which only have one or two new features.
I was willing to overlook those faults, Apple. No massive multinational technology brand is perfect. Then came the revelation that you were using updates to deliberately slow down my operating system, and the suspicion that you are doing it to force me to upgrade.
There’s the story of how you tried to sue a small iPhone repair shop in Norway for making it cheaper and easier to repair your devices.
The story of your attempts to sue people who had posted videos on YouTube on how to repair your products.
It seems you are going to become the world’s first trillion-dollar company, Apple. Since you’re doing so well, when you take legal action against people like that it just makes you look jealous.
You’ve changed, Apple. I know the death of Steve Jobs was hard for you, but I feel like it’s time for you to move on. Without him, you are losing your edge when it comes to innovation. And the other technology companies have caught up and surpassed you.
Apple, I have to admit that I have not been faithful.
When you slowed down my OS to force me to upgrade, I did. But it was to the new Huawei P20 Lite.
I’m sorry, Apple, but I have no regrets.
I am now paying 300 rand less every month for 2 gigs more data and a phone that, I’m sorry to say, Apple, keeps me completely satisfied.
My battery lasts longer, so does my data.
My new camera is better, as is my new speaker.
I no longer have to put my phone into a cup to amplify it to the point that I can actually hear it now when I play music, Apple.
I know this will be hard to hear, Apple, but I feel that these days your greatest asset is your marketing team.
Your marketing team is so charming, and they make you look so sexy that everyone finds you impossible to resist.
For many years, I did, too.
When my 13-inch MacBook Pro gives up the ghost – and judging by its recent behaviour, this will be soon – I don’t know what its replacement will be. It might be a Lenovo, or an Acer or a Dell, but I can guarantee it won’t be another one of your products.
A part of me will always miss you, Apple.
But it’s the part of me that worries about having the newest, shiniest toys, the part that worries about keeping up with my friends, and I’m afraid I have decided to tell that part of me to shut up and grow up.
I hope we can still be friends.
Love,
Daniel