The South African National Civic Organisation (Sanco) in the North West on Thursday welcomed the African National Congress (ANC) nomination of Professor Job Mokgoro as premier of the province.
Provincial Sanco chairman Paul Sebegoe said the manner in which Mokgoro reconfigured the provincial executive council (Exco) of the North West government would indicate whether he would deal decisively with the challenges facing the province.
“We can’t ignore the obvious fact that Mokgoro was nominated by the current ANC Provincial Executive Committee [PEC] which oversaw the near collapse of the Mahumapelo administration, entrenched factionalism as well deep divisions within structures of the organisation, strained relations with alliance partners and alleged rampant looting of state resources. We trust that in its wisdom the NWC [National working Committee] had considered these factors when it arrived at the decision to endorse his deployment,” he said.
Sebegoe said Mokgoro was a reputable and seasoned administrator who brings a wealth of experience and professionalism into the responsibility he would be taking over.
“The responsibility to stabilise the current administration while overseeing implementation of the recommendations of the interministerial task team towards restoring good governance and effective systems for prudent financial management suits him well.”
He said Sanco would support Mokgoro if he would not be involved in any cover-up of corruption, maladministration and prioritises the developmental needs of communities.
“The ball is now in his court to demonstrate his patriotism as well as loyalty to the people of the North West Province who will be looking up to him with the expectation that he is incorruptible and will not compromise his integrity.”
The Democratic Alliance (DA) said the first 100 days of Mokgoro’s short term as premier would be critical, given the complete collapse of the province.
“Mokgoro’s work will be hamstrung by the fact that the province is deeply factionalised and is still led by Supra Mahumapelo, the ANC provincial chairperson in the province. In short, Mahumapelo is still directing the province’s affairs,” said DA provincial leader Joe McGluwa.
“It is well known that Mokgoro is a compromise candidate, therefore his work will focus on appeasing one faction that supports Cyril Ramaphosa, and another faction that depends on the corrupt patronage network created and managed by Mahumapelo.”
He said while there was a new premier, the old ANC was still fully in power, meaning that the people would continue to suffer.
“What the province needs is real change that creates jobs, delivers quality services and acts against corruption.”
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.