If it isn’t a crisis in Rustenburg, then it’s workers bringing Charlotte Maxeke Hospital to a standstill… Our public healthcare system is in a state of distress. 
The system is plagued with whatever challenges has brought it to its knees – and that begs the question: how long can it carry the population while on its knees? 
I can only comment as an onlooker. Our health system is hampered by the unrealistic numbers it has to carry. South Africa has a very large Southern African Development Community population, most of whom came into the country as migrant workers, asylum seekers and illegal immigrants. 
When prisoners fall ill, they seek help through the public system. 
Much is said about health workers’ negative attitudes; those with no work ethic and extended tea breaks. But let us not forget those who work round the clock and go the extra mile; those who smile even when a situation should make them cry. 
These are the same staff members who sometimes must declare a patient as deceased and move right along to help another to live. They do not have the opportunity to grieve. They have to remove themselves to avoid an attachment – the mental anguish, the mental exhaustion. 
I understand why there is an expectation for them to be paid better – it is not out of greed. 
The truth is our healthcare system is doing a stellar job. Yes, there are rotten apples in the system, but it is doing a stellar job. 
Give credit where it is due. Minister of Health Aaron Motsoaledi provides 4.2 million people with ARV treatment monthly, 300 000 TB patients, more than one million pregnant women of all races, ethnicities and nationalities. 
The national health department, flaws and all, is the backbone of the country. 
Where a crisis exists, let us not lay blame, but rather understand that those who work in the system are human. 
There are men and women who bring disgrace to the system, but the system is not made up of such seedy characters. 
Understand first, before having expectations that are unrealistic.
Kekeletso Nakeli-Dhliwayo.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.