The police are continuing investigations into the murder of MP Sibusiso Radebe, who was gunned down this week.
Radebe was fatally shot in Roodepoort on Tuesday evening. Earlier reports indicated there was another person in the car with Radebe at the time and that they were not harmed.
New reports indicate that Radebe was at Tshegofatso Ntseke’s home. Tshegofatso, according to her father Phillip Ntseke, was in a relationship with the ANC MP.
The Ntseke family is aware of the relationship, according to Phillip. He said the Radebe family members were also aware of Tshegofatso’s relationship with the MP.
The father claims he witnessed one of the suspects shoot Radebe on the night.
Radebe and Tshegofatso were robbed of their cellphones. Phillip added he looked for his daughter on the night, and realised she had sought refuge and help from a neighbour.
Provincial police spokesperson Brigadier Mathapelo Peters confirmed that a 40-year-old man was killed during an attempted hijacking in the west of Johannesburg on Tuesday at about 7.30pm.
“Preliminary reports indicate that the deceased was with another person in a vehicle parked in Carbon Street, Lindhaven, when two suspects allegedly approached the vehicle and opened fire, fatally wounding the deceased, while his companion managed to escape uninjured.”
“The suspects fled in a Ford Fiesta, dark in colour, with an unknown registration. The motive is unknown, and the police investigations are under way.”
Police are appealing to members of the public for more information.
Radebe’s family spokesperson Lungile Dube reportedly said the family was devastated by the loss. Dube confirmed the MP was living with his wife, Mtikane Radebe, in Kiber Park, south of Johannesburg. Dube only said Mrs Radebe was not taking the death very well.
Radebe joined Parliament in 2009, and has served on various portfolio committees, including higher education and training, and energy. At the time of his death, he was a member of the portfolio committee on transport.
The African National Congress issued a statement, and said it sent its deepest condolences to comrade Radebe’s wife and his entire family.
“May they find solace in the knowledge that we painfully share their loss and thank them for having borrowed the ANC and the country this incomparable servant of our people.”