Democratic Alliance (DA) deputy chair Natasha Mazzone today told a journalist her reasons for taking issue with Patricia De Lille making using of EFF national chairperson Advocate Dali Mpofu’s legal services.
“I think it’s a sign of how relations have broken down between the Democratic Alliance and Patricia De Lille in that she chooses to take a chairperson of another political party to attack who was her political party, and I think it goes a long way to show that Patricia De Lille does not actually consider herself to be a member of the Democratic Alliance,” Mazzone said.
https://twitter.com/mfazwe/status/1011902746876895232
The Western Cape High Court found today that the DA had failed to comply with its own constitution in its handling of De Lille’s disciplinary processes.
The court declared that De Lille’s removal was unlawful. De Lille’s DA membership was terminated by the party after she had stated her intention to leave the organisation during a radio interview in April.
READ MORE: De Lille handed victory against DA with costs
The cessation of her membership led to her removal from the party and subsequently the mayoral position.
Ahead of her DA membership being terminated, De Lille attended an EFF-organised event which raised speculation that the red berets would be her next political home.
However, following the announcement that her DA membership had been terminated, De Lille said she would map out her political future once her name had been cleared, and she had resolved the matters with the DA.
Following her court victory today, De Lille tweeted a message of gratitude to those who had supported and kept her in their prayers.


She said the court victory was not only for her but for the people of Cape Town.


De Lille added that she feels more energised to continue fighting for the marginalised people of the city.


Meanwhile, following her court victory, EFF spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi questioned why the DA had not been described as fascist for how it had handled De Lille’s matter.
News24 reports that following today’s court judgement, the DA intends to file another motion of no confidence in De Lille.
READ MORE: Who are the fascists now? asks Ndlozi after DA’s De Lille loss
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.