Tracy Lee Stark, Jacques Nelles and Michel Bega have been nominated for their outstanding work as finalists in the Standard Bank Sikuvile Awards, a prestigious journalism competition. 
The finalists were selected from hundreds of entries around the country.
Jacques Nelles.
Nelles, based in Pretoria, has been nominated twice, one for an entry in the news photography category depicting a man leaping during a taxi industry march to the department of transport, and another in the feature photography category for his delightful picture of a child swinging and splashing in the mud after rain.
Children play on a swing above a puddle of water after the previous night’s rain in a park in Soshanguve, 26 September 2017, Pretoria. Picture: Jacques Nelles
Nelles started working at The Citizen in 2016 after completing a photojournalism course at the Market Photo Workshop.
Michel Bega.
Bega is also a finalist in the news photography category for an image of a dramatic arrest during a protest at the Civic Centre in Johannesburg by the Jozi@ Work team after new mayor Herman Mashaba scrapped the work programme.
A worker from the Jozi@Work programme, affiliated to the Joburg Social Movement, is arrested during a protest through the streets of Joburg while the group marched to the Johannesburg Council Chambers, 23 February 2017. Picture: Michel Bega
Bega has been with The Citizen for 18 years, and serves as a photographer and the picture editor. 
Tracy Lee Stark.
Stark was nominated for a behind-the-scenes series of Russia’s acclaimed St Petersburg Ballet Theatre during their performances of Swan Lake at Montecasino.
Photographer Tracy Lee Stark spent some time behind the scenes with Russia’s critically acclaimed St Petersburg Ballet Theatre who are on tour at Monte Casino in Johannesburg, South Africa from the 15th September until the 24th September 2017. 
Stark has been with The Citizen since 2013 and has been a photojournalist since 2007.
Themba Siwela.
Cartoonist Themba Siwela is a finalist in the editorial cartoons category for a collection of his exceptional cartoons. 
The awards will be presented on September 13. 
– Citizen reporter 
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.