“I now have to ask the baas first whether I can do anything or go anywhere. I reserve my rights and will continue to go where communities invite me,” she continued.
The remarks show that De Lille will not take lightly the party’s decision to reduce her role to that of a ceremonial mayor through a caucus vote on Thursday.
She has vowed to challenge the removal of her executive powers in court.
A full council meeting took place yesterday, where the motion, brought by deputy mayor and Democratic Alliance caucus leader Ian Neilson, was passed.
One-hundred-and-thirty-seven councillors voted in favour of the motion and 50 against, while two abstained. The ANC and EFF rejected the proposal, while the ACDP said it supported the move in principle, but not for short-term interests while the matter was before the courts.
Effectively, all of the mayor’s delegated powers and legislative authority will now be reassigned, and there must now be consensus by way of a council meeting before anything is decided.
De Lille fired back at the council, saying she reserved her rights in the matter, News24 reported on Thursday.
“I must remind councillors that service delivery does not take place in boardrooms, but on the streets. This is going to severely hamper service delivery.
“If this is the route the council wants to take, [so be it].
“As I’ve said, I reserve my rights, and we will see each other in court.” At this, the ANC councillors erupted into applause.
Patricia De Lille has been very active since the Western Cape High Court’s ruling to reinstate her as mayor of Cape Town.
The ANC did not mince words. “Look at this nonsense. How can they be so disrespectful to the mayor while the mayor is speaking?” asked ANC caucus leader Xolani Sotashe, who claimed the DA was trying to change the mayor’s powers “through the backdoor”.
“This has absolutely nothing to do with service delivery and the interests of the poor, but more to do with their promises to special interest groups working behind the scenes,” Sotashe continued.
“How can a mayor report to her mayoral committee?” added ANC councillor Thembelani Sakathi.
EFF councillor Andrew Arnolds said the changes were “unconstitutional”, and violated the Municipal Structures Act. De Lille must fight the changes “tooth and nail”, he said.
“There’s a fighter there that’s gonna deal with you. You can expect another court case to come,” he warned.
ACDP councillor Grant Haskin said the party supported the move in principle in the long term, but said council could not risk the wrath of the high court after it reinstated De Lille on the basis of the “status quo” remaining temporarily.
The Western Cape High Court meanwhile is due to sit on Monday to rule on De Lille’s application to intervene in the party’s decision to cease her membership.
The ruling will dictate whether De Lille can permanently return to her position, albeit ceremonially.
De Lille passed a budget, lauded as being “pro-poor”, on Wednesday.