A controversial new organisation is growing in the Mother City. Gatvol Capetonian is a group that was formed at the end of April, describing themselves as a “group of gatvol [fed up] Capetonians” who are sick of “racist” BEE policies, poor service delivery and crime, The South African has reported.
The group, which already has almost 9 000 followers on Facebook, is not affiliated to any political party, and seems to display a general hatred towards politicians, with their Facebook displaying the slogan, ‘the only good politician is a dead politician’.
The image used as a Cover Photo on Gatvol Capetonian’s Facebook page..
While they do not have anything nice to say about either the DA or the ANC, their main venom seems to be aimed at government, as they say they are “suffering at the hands of black oppression and black racism” due to the fact that they “are not ethnically black citizens of this country”.
The group was founded and is led by three coloured men from Cape Town. Oscar Lyons is the media liaison, Fadiel Adams is the national spokesperson, and Ebrahiem Davids is the chairperson.
While the group has already faced heavy criticism over their comments about black South Africans coming into Cape Town from the Eastern Cape, the men say they are not racist.
“I am not a racist. We have never shown hatred towards blacks. This is about fairness, justice and equality. We have welcomed people from the Eastern Cape until we discovered they don’t want us here. They want our land,” Adams said.
“65-year-old grandmothers are living in wendy houses while 25-year-old black youth from the Eastern Cape have been here for six months and get title deeds.”
The group has demand that the Cape Town International Airport be renamed Krotoa or Saartjie Baartman as put forward at a recent meeting at the airport that descended into chaos, where “will be war if another name is chosen”. Lyons has described the organisation’s goal as “raising awareness” in the minority community as well as lobbying for the Cape to become independent.
Part of their goal is to unite South Africa’s minority groups.
“The actual goal and aim of the organisation is to raise awareness in the coloured community and also the broader minority community – white and Indian as well, about how we’re being mauled over, bootstrapped and everything by the Democratic Alliance, ANC and all of the coalition partners.”