ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule’s call for dissatisfied party members not to approach courts with internal party squabbles appears to have fallen on deaf ears as a group in Limpopo has served the ANC with papers to interdict this weekend’s planned provincial elective conference. 
The application was filed yesterday. 
The party was due to kick off its ninth provincial elective conference today. If the interdict proceeds, more than 1 600 delegates will be forced to go home. 
Provincial spokesperson Khumbudzo Ntshavheni said: “We are [still] continuing with preparations for the conference.” 
The Citizen understands a group of branch leaders petitioned Magashule regarding their intention to interdict the ANC conference. 
The letter, which The Citizen has seen, states the current provincial executive committee (PEC) is illegitimate and unconstitutional. 
“Their term of office lapsed in February (2018), but this illegitimate PEC continued to take executive and administrative decisions,” reads the letter. 
The group, represented by Tumi Mokwena Attorneys, are from ward 24 in Sefako Makgatho, ward 15 in Molemole, ward eight in Polokwane and ward 10 in Blouberg, all in the Peter Mokaba region. 
They are also accusing the coordinator of the Peter Mokaba regional task team, Eugene Masete, of contravening ANC guidelines and democratic practice and opening the branch packages. 
KwaZulu-Natal’s provincial elective conference was postponed last weekend amid internal squabbles. And last week, Magashule said the party had decided to postpone all regional conferences scheduled in Gauteng this weekend. 
ANC provincial spokesperson in Limpopo Khumbudzo Ntshaveni said yesterday they have not yet heard from the lawyers representing the disgruntled members. 
“We therefore take it that all is well and we continue with the conference unless there are surprising eventualities at the conference tomorrow.” 
Ntshaveni said preparations were currently at advanced stage. 
“It is no longer a matter of where, when or if, but of what time to start with the opening of the conference,” Ntshavheni said. 
– alexm@citizen.co.za 
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.