NPA spokesperson Phindi Mjonondwane said the docket was still with the director of public prosecutions at the South Gauteng High Court in Johannesburg.
Although Moyane was expected to appear in the Roodepoort Magistrates’ Court on Friday, Mjonondwane said he would not need to appear.
While the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) has not yet decided whether or not to prosecute suspended Sars commissioner Tom Moyane for assault, the mother of the complainant said she would wait for the legal process to unfold.
Moyane allegedly assaulted his 24-year-old son’s 17-year-old girlfriend, who is the mother of Moyane’s six-month-old grandson.
A medical report allegedly showed she suffered a bruised jaw, a cut cheek and a bruise to her stomach.
The National Prosecuting Authority is apparently deciding whether to instate criminal charges against Moyane when he appears in court this week.
The Sunday Times quotes the young woman as accusing Moyane of kicking her “like a ninja” and “rugby tackling” her during an argument in which Moyane allegedly blamed her for his troubles and called her a witch at his house in Johannesburg.
The incident was allegedly kicked off by the teenager telling Moyane she was recording him telling her to get out of his home on her cellphone – and he then tried to grab the phone from her.
Moyane’s only son, Hlekani, and the young woman – who can’t be named because she’s still a minor – started dating in 2016.
The woman’s mother was apparently on a call with her and heard the violent confrontation. The paper further reports that Moyane allegedly denied the woman access to her child for a month.
Despite reading questions from the Sunday Times, Moyane did not respond.


Moyane has been suspended by President Cyril Ramaphosa‚ who has accused him of gross misconduct over his handling of an investigation into former senior Sars official Jonas Makwakwa, as well as his handling of a VAT refund for the Gupta family, among other things. Moyane has been suspended by President Cyril Ramaphosa‚ who has accused him of gross misconduct over his handling of an investigation into former senior Sars official Jonas Makwakwa, as well as his handling of a VAT refund for the Gupta family, among other things.