Chinese authorities have confirmed that the passports of the group of 51 South Africans who are stranded in  Changchun, will be released next week, the Department of International Relations and Cooperation (Dirco) said.
Dirco said the passports would be released on Monday, and the group would then return to South Africa.
International Relations and Cooperation Minister, Lindiwe Sisulu, thanked the Chinese authorities for releasing the passports and ensuring that the group would be allowed to leave China.
“I am happy that this incident has been resolved. l want to make a call to all South Africans that they must familiarise themselves with the laws and regulations of countries they visit or apply for work. They must also ensure that they have the correct documentation before they travel,” Sisulu said.
Sisulu said said that Dirco would  launch a campaign titled: “Travel Smart” in few weeks to raise awareness of all South African travellers. The campaign is aimed at encouraging South Africans to research their destinations and the laws of the countries they seek to visit or apply for work.
“We have too many South Africans in prisons across the world, which is of concern.  We want South Africans to research and gather all necessary information before they travel, so as to avoid taking risks and involving themselves in activities that may be deemed illegal.”
Dirco said that an official from the South African Embassy in Beijing will travel to Changchun on Monday to provide consular assistance to the group.
On Thursday, Dirco said it was working with Chinese authorities to help the group of South Africans who are stranded in China due to a visa scam.
At the time, Sisulu said in a statement that she was aware of South African citizens who are stranded in China as a result of the visa scam and said she had instructed the department to work with the Chinese authorities to have their passports released so that they can come back to South Africa as soon as possible.
According to the SA Embassy in Beijing, 51 young South Africans were enticed by an agent to travel to China on a study visa while planning to work as English teachers. The promise was that they would get their work visas upon arrival in the country but this never materialised. While in China on study visas they started working which was in contravention of the immigration laws of the Republic of China.
“Our embassy in Beijing is liaising with the Chinese authorities in addressing this matter. We are also in touch with the Chinese Ambassador to South Africa to have their passports released. The Chinese Ambassador to South Africa has made an undertaking that he will expedite the matter,” said Sisulu at the time.
“We are very much aware that the Chinese authorities will follow their own legal process when such a violation occurs and deal with the matter accordingly,” added Sisulu.
“We appeal to all South Africans to be cautious of these scams and to check with the relevant authorities before travelling to other countries. Dirco will continue to provide consular assistance to those South Africans in distress and also to keep those affected families informed of the latest developments.”
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.