More than R250 000 was raised for operations on rectifiable eye conditions in Pretoria on Thursday, Pretoria East Rekord reports.
This formed part of a Dinner in the Dark initiative by Round Table Pretoria 136, along with Fight4Sight and the Centurion Eye Hospital.
READ MORE: Health MEC to pay blind boy almost R11.4m
“Dinner in the Dark aims to raise money to pay for operations on rectifiable eye conditions which, if left untreated, lead to permanent blindness,” said Round Table spokesperson Chris Bezuidenhout.
He said the initiative was now in its third year and especially sought to help children.
“Last year, we raised R100 000, and I am glad to say that we have almost tripled that figure.”
Guests were served a four-course meal while wearing glasses simulating the leading causes of permanent blindness: glaucoma, cataracts and macular degeneration.
Ophthalmologist Dr Etienne le Roux briefed guests on the differences between these conditions.
“Despite progress made in ophthalmology, cataracts remain the leading cause of permanent blindness,” he said.
“This is basically a good camera with a dirty lens, and can be instantly treated with a 10-minute surgery.”
Another cause of blindness, glaucoma, which is caused by high pressure in the eye, is also easily treatable with an eye drop once a day.
“Macular degeneration affects mostly the elderly and affects central vision,” said Le Roux.
“There are two forms – the dry one, for which there is no effective treatment, and the wet form, which requires monthly injections into the eye.”
Carla Olivier, an optometrist working with Fight4Sight, explained how patients in need were selected.
“We look at the quality of the patient’s vision. They will not qualify for a driver’s licence, and do not have access to private healthcare or medical aid.”
Fight4Sight’s main focus was on treating conditions in children including inward- and outward-turning eyes that were aligned to improve vision.
Congenital cataracts, which affect some children from birth, were also treated to prevent permanent eye damage.
Round Table received an anonymous donation of R250 000 for devices used to detect cataracts.
Items such as a Polar sunglasses set and two 1.5 litre bottles of wine were also auctioned in the evening.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.