Dimakatjo Diale , 17, died days after suffering a blow to the head when a member of staff opened a window under which she was sitting outside a classroom, Bosveld Review reports.
To add insult to injury, the family feels the hospital she was treated at was negligent in their duties.
READ MORE: Girl, 15, found dead in her bedroom in Limpopo
Dimakatjo’s uncle, Joseph Magongwa, told Bosveld Review in an exclusive interview on Tuesday, June 19, that the family was struggling to process the shock of her death and was saddened by how the situation was being handled by the school.
He added Diale’s stay at Mokopane Hospital remained a vivid and maddening memory.
The incident is thought to have happened on Monday, May 28, before Dimakatjo returned home from school.
“She told us she was sitting in the sun during break when the window was opened and bumped against her head.”
Three days later, she still seemed off-balance and kept complaining of a headache, he explained.
“We took her to Mokopane Hospital, and after an examination she was sent home with some tablets.” He said her health deteriorated from this point on.
“She lost her ability to speak, was confused and lost control of her movement.”
He took his niece back to the hospital, and on Friday, June 8, he reported the incident at Mahwelereng Police Station.
“When I visited her, I found her with her hands tied above her head to the bed. I asked the nurse on duty why this was the case.
“The nurse explained to me that it is for her own protection.”
Dimakatjo passed away the following day. The cause of death was stated as ‘natural’.
Magongwa said the school had yet to pay respect to the family.
“The principal did not even come to apologise. I know an accident can happen easily. I don’t want to point fingers, but he could have come and see the family.”
Magongwa says the family tried to meet the principal, Willy Ramosedi Phasha, at the school, but he refused.
“I am left with so many questions.”
Dimakatjo is said to have been a healthy teenager who enjoyed life, learning at school and socialising with friends, “the normal stuff teenagers enjoy doing”.
A sombre Magongwa with his head in his hands concluded the interview: “We never thought that we will bury my niece under this circumstances.”
Colonel Moatshe Ngoepe, spokesperson Limpopo SAPS, says an inquest was opened. “Our investigations are ongoing.”
Department of education spokesperson Sam Makonde confirmed they were also looking into the matter. “We will leave no stone unturned in our quest to establish the exact picture.”
The health department had not responded to queries by the time of publishing.
The school’s principal declined to comment on the matter.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.