Justin Snaith has announced on social media that Oh Susanna and Legislate will not be taking their places in this year’s Vodacom Durban July at Greyville racecourse on Saturday 7 July.
Snaith posted this information on Snaith Racing’s Facebook page on Sunday evening. The post reads as follows:
“Both Legislate and Oh Susanna will not take part in the 2018 Vodacom July.
LEGISLATE will run in the Grade 2 Post Merchants on 15 June at Greyville with Bernard Fayd’Herbe up. After a two-year absence, he is not yet t enough to go the Durban July trip (2200m).
OH SUSANNA has already won three Group 1 races this season and has earned a well deserved rest before she has another crack the Grade 1 Cartier Paddock Stakes and Grade 1 Sun Met next year. Had the July been a pure Weight-for-Age event then she may have taken part.


As a three-year-old filly she has to give weight all around to hard knocking older males (despite being capped at 56kg and receiving a six-point buffer) which is a near impossible task for a young three-year-old filly.
MADE TO CONQUER, who won the Grade 3 Lonsdale Stirrup Cup impressively on Saturday, to make it six wins from his last seven starts, will now be supplemented into the Vodacom Durban July on Monday morning. He gets better with every effort and must have a huge shout with 54kgs on his back.”
With the final supplementary stage yesterday, Snaith officially withdrew both Legislate and Oh Susanna while Made To Conquer was supplemented into the R4.25- million race.
In other news, trainer Stuart Pettigrew also pulled Daily News 2000 winner Surcharge out of the Durban July. Pettigrew said after the running of the R2-million race at Greyville on Saturday he would be giving his charge a well deserved rest and bring him back in the summer.



The current betting on the Vodacom Durban July is:
Current Betting: 3-1 African Night Sky; 11-2 Majestic Mambo; 6-1 Do It Again; 11- 1 Elusive Silva; 18-1 Made To Conquer, White River; 20-1 Cascapedia, Abashiri, Pack Leader; 28-1 Dark Moon Rising, Coral Fever; 33-1 and upwards others.






Would you like to place a bet
on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.