South African and Indian senior officials have marked the 125th anniversary of the day in which Indian independence activist Mahatma Gandhi was thrown out of the whites-only section of a train in a ceremony linking his legacy with that of Nelson Mandela.
The minister of external affairs of India, minister Sushma Swaraj, took part in the commemoration in Durban of the day, 7 June 1893, when a young Mahatma Gandhi was forcibly removed from the first class, whites-only carriage of a train in Pietermaritzburg.
South Africa was represented by KwaZulu-Natal premier Willies Mchunu and deputy minister of international relations and cooperation Luwellyn Landers.
Department of international relations and cooperation (Dirco) spokesperson Ndivhuwo Mabaya said the ties between India and South Africa were cemented by the foundation laid by their respective liberation icons; Ghandi and Mandela.
South Africa was central to forging Gandhi’s identity as a political activist and his time here was an important prelude in developing his thinking prior to his return to India.
Mandela later acknowledged that the values of tolerance, mutual respect and unity for which Gandhi stood and acted had a profound impact on South Africa’s own liberation movement and on his own thinking.
“Mohandas Gandhi arrived in South Africa as a young lawyer in 1893 and shortly after his arrival he booked a first class ticket on the train to Pretoria, where he was to undertake business on behalf of the legal firm where he was employed.
“On a cold June day he was forcibly removed by the rail authorities at Pietermaritzburg from the first class compartment and thrown off the train following a complaint from one of the passengers. He subsequently spent the night in the station’s waiting room,”said Mabaya.
Mabaya said the event initiated his contemplation of racial discrimination and represented the beginning of his philosophy of Satyagraha (truth-force) and Ahimsa. This philosophy became one of the greatest political drivers of the twentieth century, influencing the civil rights movement in the United States and the African National Congress (ANC) in South Africa.
“Both Mandela and Gandhi were visionary leaders who were ahead of their times. Modern day India, with its extraordinary economic growth and development, and South Africa, have carved a niche as influential global players, as witnessed by our roles in BRICS, IORA, IBSA and the G20, as well as within the United Nations system,” said Mabaya.
– African News Agency (ANA)
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.