Two alleged armed robbers were caught hiding out at the house of one of their parents in Evander on Monday, 11 June, Ridge Times reports.
According to Capt Bettina Zondo, spokesperson of Secunda Police Station, two men, aged 28 and 29, were caught after pulling off an armed robbery in Secunda at about 2.30pm on the same day.
READ MORE: Man shot in the arm during Spur robbery
Capt Zondo said the victim told the police one of the suspects phoned him and claimed to be a police officer.  The suspect asked the victim to meet him at the Wimpy in Secunda.
“At Wimpy the two suspects requested the victim to go with them to his car in order to talk there. When they were inside the car, one suspect pointed a firearm at the victim and instructed him to drive them to his house.”
Capt Zondo said the victim was forced to stop along the way and withdraw R2 000 from his bank account.
When the three arrived at the victim’s house in Suurberg Street, the suspects robbed him of his television, wristwatch and other electrical appliances before fleeing in the victim’s silver grey BMW 320 D.
This 303 rifle and ammunition were confiscated at the house in Boston Street, Evander, along with a .22 rifle.
The house robbery was reported to Secunda police. A call for help was also aired on Zello and StratconRisk immediately responded.
The tracker on the stolen vehicle was activated. Members of the police’s Flying Squad, the K9 Unit, StratconRisk and Jelani Security tracked the vehicle to where it was parked on the pavement of a house in Boston Street where one of the suspects apparently still lives with his parents.
Taking a breather after the chase, are Messrs Alf Byleveldt from Jelani Security and Jacques Fourie from StratconRisk.
Both men were arrested. The stolen BMW, as well as the Mercedes-Benz they used to go to the Wimpy, a Samsung flatscreen television, an unlicensed 303 rifle and ammunition, a licensed .22 rifle and a magazine with nine rounds, television games, wireless earphones, cash and cigarettes stolen during the house robbery, were found at the house.
The pair was set to appear in Secunda Magistrate’s Court on Wednesday, 13 June.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.