The African National Congress (ANC) is in a race to fill the vacant post of North West premier by the end of the week and the party’s national working committee (NWC) are meeting today, ANC secretary general Ace Magashule said.
The party’s national executive committee (NEC) mandated the NWC to take a decision on the premier by tomorrow.
“The special NEC mandated the NWC to take a decision on the premier candidate by Thursday, the 21st of June 2018. In this regard, a special NWC will sit on Wednesday the 20th of June 2018 to conclude on the matter,” Magashule said in a statement after the special NEC meeting.
North West Judge President Monica Leeuw, has issued a notice convening the North West provincial legislature on Friday, to fill the vacancy of the premier, following the resignation of former premier Supra Mahumapelo.
Mahumapelo resigned on May 23, following a wave of violent protests sweeping through the province calling for his resignation.
Before his resignation, Mahumapelo appointed finance, economic and enterprise development member of the executive council (MEC) Wendy Nelson as an acting premier on May 9, while he took indefinite leave.
The Democratic Alliance (DA) in the North West said it was disturbed by the fact that Nelson was fully functioning in the role of premier without being sworn in within five days after her appointment.
DA chief whip Jacqueline Theologo said this was a blatant violation of Section 131(3) of the Constitution, which states that “before assuming the responsibilities, powers and functions of the premier, the acting premier must swear or affirm faithfulness to the Republic and obedience to the Constitution”.
She said it was further alarming that Mahumapelo had appointed Nelson knowing full well that Section 131(1) of the Constitution clearly states that the premier can only appoint an acting premier when he/she is on leave.
“In this instance where the premier resigned, a member of the Executive Council should have been designated by other members or alternatively the Speaker must act as premier if Executive Council fails to elect an acting premier. The appointment of Wendy Nelson was therefore unconstitutional,” she said.
– African News Agency (ANA)
ALSO READ: Three names in the hat to fill North West premier post
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.