The South African Weather Service has warned that most parts of the Gauteng province, including Joburg, will experience a significant drop in temperatures to about six degrees on Friday, Rosebank Killarney Gazette reports.
“Temperatures will continue to drop to about three degrees on Saturday and Sunday, with a steady increase towards Monday, June 18,” said Robert Mulaudzi, spokesperson for the City of Joburg EMS.
READ MORE: Flooding in parts of Cape Town as cold front makes landfall
He also explained the significant drop in temperatures meant most of the residents in the city would be forced to use heating and lighting appliances to try and warm themselves. These appliances might be dangerous if they are not used safely.
“Emergency Management Services will remain on high alert to make sure that we can be able to respond to any emergency which might occur,” he said.
“The main focus will be on our 189 informal settlements throughout the city since they are the most vulnerable to fire incidents when we have cold weather conditions,” said Mulaudzi.
The City’s Disaster Management Centre will be fully operational throughout the weekend, and Disaster Management Monitoring teams have been dispatched to all seven regions of the City to monitor any eventuality that might occur.
“We also want to urge all our residents who are within the formal residential areas not to leave the heaters unattended while in use to avoid fire incidents,” Mulaudzi warned.
Here are some of the safety tips:
Candle safety tips:

Keep candles away from children.
A child should not be left unattended in a room with a candle.
Store candles, matches and lighters away from the reach of children.
A candle should not be used to light stoves.
A candle should not be used in a confined space.

Braizers or imbawula
Use it in a well-ventilated area to avoid carbon monoxide inhalation, and take it outside before you go to bed.
 Paraffin

Put your paraffin stove on a flat surface where it cannot fall or get knocked over.
Use safe containers to store paraffin e.g. safety cap bottles.

Before you go to bed or out 

Never go to bed or out with a candle or paraffin lamp is still burning.
Switch off heaters and stoves at the plug before going to bed or out.
Always put out cigarettes carefully. Do not smoke in bed.

For any life-threatening emergencies call 10177 on Telkom landline or 112 on your cellphone or 011 375 5911.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.