Minister of Mineral Resources Gwede Mantashe today said the country has a backlog of about eight years in issuing of mining rights, as proper processing of applications for mining licences has stalled over the years.
“A preliminary internal investigation shows that the backlog on new mineral right applications stretches as far back as 2012; while applications for renewal of prospecting right applications go as far back as 2010,” Mantashe said.
“The implication of unprocessed renewal applications is that it blocks any other party from applying for a mining right in that area. We are putting measures in place to overcome this hurdle, to ensure that prospectors can prospect, and those with the legal permits and the means to mine can do so.”
Mantashe was speaking during the debate vote of his department at the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) in parliament today, adding that an audit of all applications, permits and mining rights were among various considerations to deal with the backlog.
Mantashe also said the death-toll increase in mining accidents was a serious concern, adding that the department’s Council for Geoscience (CGS) and other stakeholders were paying special attention into seismicity.
Since the beginning of 2018, a total of 33 fatalities have been reported in the South African mining industry.
“The CGS has undertaken detailed dolomite stability and susceptibility investigations for housing infrastructure development, in the Northern Cape Province, with the specific intention to reduce infrastructure damages arising from geo-hazards associated with the extensive occurrence of dolomite,” he said.
“In this regard, it is worth noting the improvements in health and safety, that is, an 11 percent decrease in the number of injuries in 2017, as well as a 29 percent reduction in the number of occupational diseases reported. ”
Mantashe reiterated that the department will host the mine health and safety summit in November to assess progress made in attaining the industry’s objective of “zero harm”, and to chart a way forward.
– African News Agency (ANA)
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.