The KwaZulu-Natal (KZN) ANC provincial conference was expected to get under way this weekend, but that never came to be after an urgent court interdict filed by a faction of the provincial ANC.
To save what was left of the conference, the party converted it into a “consultative” conference that was supposed to kick off with a keynote address from ANC national chairperson Gwede Mantashe on Friday, but the pro-Zuma faction would not have it. They sang “what did Zuma do?” in isiZulu to frustrate Mantashe’s efforts to deliver the address. In the end, the “consultative” conference was also called off.
WATCH: Gwede Mantashe drowned out by angry KZN delegates
But to speak of factions in ANC in KZN, the picture gets clearer when the divisions are seen as split not only between President Cyril Ramaphosa and Zuma. According to a City Press report, a battle between Zuma supporter Super Zuma and former KZN ANC spokesperson Ndumiseni Ntuli has driven a wedge in the provincial structure.
The former provincial secretary of the disbanded provincial executive committee (PEC), Super Zuma, is hoping to be appointed to that position again.
Here is what we know so far:

Super Zuma and Ndumiseni Ntuli have been in the running to be elected provincial secretary, an influential position in the provincial structure that has raised the stakes ahead of the conference.
It is understood that lobbyists recently persuaded Ntuli to accept the nomination to challenge Super Zuma. The two were in the PEC that has since been nullified.
Super Zuma has the most reason to smile after the interdict that halted the provincial conference. The interdict was obtained by members of the Lower South Coast, Moses Mabhida and Harry Gwala regions.
On Friday night, when Mantashe struggled to address to the hostile crowd gathered at the University of Zululand, Sihle Zikalala was still able to hold their attention. This was more than just incidental, as both factions in support of Ntuli and Super Zuma are united in their support of Zikalala.
A lobbyist for Ntuli has claimed, speaking to City Press, that Super Zuma and Jacob Zuma were viewed as the cause of divisions in the provincial structure of the ANC.
Leading up to the conference, Jacob Zuma is understood to have on Wednesday rejected a list that proposes Zikalala as the provincial chairperson as well as Ntuli as the secretary. It also included Willies Mchunu as the deputy chairperson.
The endorsement for Ntuli is also fuelled by the determination of some in the province to include younger people in leadership positions. An Ntuli lobbyist told City Press that they were tired of being pushed around by the old guard.

ALSO READ: Mantashe and co call off consultative conference after overwhelming heckles
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.