Several people were trapped at the top of a building in the Johannesburg central business district on Thursday afternoon after a fire broke out at a block of flats, Johannesburg Emergency Management Services said.
EMS spokeswoman Nana Radebe said the fire broke out in a residential building on Rissik Street.
EMS are pictured at the scene of a fire at corner of Rissik Street and De Villiers in the Johannesburg CBD, 16 August 2018. SAPS, JMPD, The Gauteng traffic department, and Home Affairs were busy with crime prevention operations in the CBD when the fire was allegedly set by residents before a raid was conducted in the building. The fire has was contained quickly and no injuries were reported. Picture: Tracy Lee Stark
“We now have two fire engines on scene and the fire is under control,” she said.
“For now, we do not have any injuries reported as yet, but we have people trapped on top of the building, and we are still trying to rescue them.”
EMS are pictured at the scene of a fire at corner of Rissik Street and De Villiers in the Johannesburg CBD, 16 August 2018. SAPS, JMPD, The Gauteng traffic department, and Home Affairs were busy with crime prevention operations in the CBD when the fire was allegedly set by residents before a raid was conducted in the building. The fire has was contained quickly and no injuries were reported. Picture: Tracy Lee Stark
Rissik Street, a major street passing in front of Johannesburg Park Station, has been closed off to traffic at Plein Street up to Braamfontein.
The fire appeared to be blazing on the first floor while the building is engulfed by a thick cloud of black smoke. The building is used by homeless people while a variety of smallholding shops occupy the ground floor.
EMS are pictured at the scene of a fire at corner of Rissik Street and De Villiers in the Johannesburg CBD, 16 August 2018. SAPS, JMPD, The Gauteng traffic department, and Home Affairs were busy with crime prevention operations in the CBD when the fire was allegedly set by residents before a raid was conducted in the building. The fire has was contained quickly and no injuries were reported. Picture: Tracy Lee Stark
Police on the scene have declined to speak with the media, pushing onlookers as far away as possible.
The cause of the fire remains unknown at this stage.
– African News Agency (ANA)