Protests in Zimbabwe against alleged election fraud turned bloody on Wednesday when soldiers opened fire and three people were killed, shaking hopes that the vote would mark a new era for the country.
Soldiers fired live ammunition during opposition MDC party protests in downtown Harare, AFP witnesses saw, with one man shot dead in the stomach.


Monday’s polls — the first since autocratic president Robert Mugabe was forced out by a brief military takeover in November — had been meant to turn the page on years of violence-marred elections and brutal repression of dissent.
But the mood quickly descended into anger and chaos as supporters of the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) opposition declared they were being cheated in the election count.
“You said you were better than Mugabe — you are the picture of Mugabe,” shouted one young male protester wearing a white T-shirt. “We need security for the people.”


Official results showed that the ruling ZANU-PF party had easily won most seats in the parliamentary ballot — strengthening President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s prospects of holding onto power in the key presidential race.
MDC supporters, who say their leader Nelson Chamisa won the vote, burnt tyres and pulled down street signs as protests spread from the party headquarters in Harare.
Police confirmed the death toll of three, and Mnangagwa issued a statement blaming the opposition for the unrest and fatalities.
“We hold the opposition MDC Alliance and its whole leadership responsible for this disturbance of national peace,” he said, adding the government “went out of its way” to try to ensure the elections were peaceful.
The United States embassy called for security forces “to use restraint in dispersing protesters”, saying it was “deeply concerned by events” in the Zimbabwean capital.


Mnangagwa, 75, had promised a free and fair vote after the military ushered him to power in November when Mugabe was forced to resign.
A credible and peaceful vote was meant to end Zimbabwe’s international isolation and draw in foreign investment to revive the shattered economy.
The MDC, which accuses the election authorities of falsifying results, said the army had opened fire “for no apparent reason” leading to the deaths of unarmed civilians.
Former colonial power Britain on Wednesday also called for restraint in Zimbabwe after at least three people were killed when soldiers opened fire on crowds protesting alleged fraud in this week’s election.
Foreign office minister Harriett Baldwin said on Twitter that she was “deeply concerned” by the violence in Zimbabwe following the first nationwide vote since autocratic president Robert Mugabe was forced out by a brief military takeover in November.
“Call on Zimbabwe’s political leaders to take responsibility for ensuring calm & restraint at this critical moment. We’re continuing to closely monitor the situation,” she said.
Human rights group Amnesty International called on Zimbabwe’s authorities to launch “a prompt and effective” probe into the deadly military crackdown.
“The army’s conduct should be promptly investigated, with those responsible brought to justice,” said Colm O Cuanachain, Acting Secretary General of the London-based organisation.
“The militarization of the prevailing post-election environment is muzzling freedom of expression, association and assembly.
“People must be guaranteed their right to protest,” he added.
Monday’s polls had been meant to turn bring an end to years of violence-marred elections and brutal repression of dissent.
But the mood quickly descended into anger and chaos as supporters of the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) opposition declared they were being cheated in the election count.
Official results showed that the ruling ZANU-PF party had easily won most seats in the parliamentary ballot — strengthening President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s chances of holding onto power in the presidential race.
MDC supporters, who say their leader Nelson Chamisa won the vote, burnt tyres and pulled down street signs as protests spread from the party headquarters in Harare.
Police confirmed the death toll of three, and Mnangagwa issued a statement blaming the opposition for the unrest and fatalities.
‘Un-level playing field’
European Union observers had earlier declared they found an “un-level playing field and lack of trust” in the election process. It called for transparency in the release of results.
“On many occasions — preparation, financing, media and hopefully not in the counting — it was advantageous for the ruling party,” EU chief observer Elmar Brok told AFP.
Under Mugabe’s 37-year reign, elections were often marred by fraud and deadly violence, with European Union observers banned since 2002.
The Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (ZEC) said Wednesday that of 210 parliamentary seats, 205 had been counted with ZANU-PF winning 144 and the MDC Alliance 61.
“The results are biased, trying to give the impression that ZANU has won,” said Lawrence Maguranyi, 21, an MDC supporter and university student protesting at the party headquarters.
MDC leader Nelson Chamisa, 40, said the presidential results were fraudulent.
“We have won this one together. No amount of results manipulation will alter your will,” he tweeted before the army were deployed.
Delayed results?
The electoral commission warned that final results of the presidential first round may not be known until Friday or Saturday.
Commission chairwoman Priscilla Chigumba, a high court judge, has flatly denied allegations of bias and strongly disputed accusations of rigging.
Mugabe, 94, voted in Harare on Monday alongside his wife Grace after he stunned observers by calling for voters to reject ZANU-PF, his former party.
His attempts to position Grace as his successor are widely thought to have driven the military to intervene and put their favoured candidate, Mnangagwa, in power.
Mnangagwa, Mugabe’s former right-hand man, was the clear election front-runner, benefitting from tacit military support and control of state resources.
But Chamisa, a lawyer and pastor who performed strongly on the campaign trail, sought to tap into the youth and urban vote.
He has repeatedly accused ZANU-PF and election authorities of trying to use a flawed electoral register and fixed ballot papers to steal the election.
Mnangagwa was allegedly involved in violence and intimidation during the 2008 elections when then opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai pulled out of the run-off after attacks claimed the lives of at least 200 of his supporters.
Earlier:
Meanwhile, Zimbabwean police have confirmed that the death toll has risen to three people killed after the army opened fire in central Harare during demonstrations over alleged fraud in the country’s elections.
“The Zimbabwe Republic Police would like to confirm the unfortunate deaths of three people during the riots and melee which occurred in Harare Central business district,” police spokesperson Charity Charamba told state television.
The US embassy said in a statement: “We urge leaders of all parties to call for calm… We further urge the Defense Forces of Zimbabwe to use restraint in dispersing protesters.” It added it was “deeply concerned” by events in the Zimbabwean capital.
The shootings happened during demonstrations in Harare on Wednesday against alleged election fraud.
By nightfall, a stream of security forces has locked down the city centre and normally bustling areas like the bus station are deserted, AFP reports.
A number of tanks have reportedly been seen in the capital with helicopters overhead. Army tanks can be seen crisscrossing the street, making it near impossible to leave the CBD, according to reports.


AFP witnessed the Zimbabwean army opening fire in central Harare on Wednesday as protests erupted over alleged fraud in the country’s election.


The man died after being shot in the stomach, an AFP photographer said, confirming that he died at the scene.
A Zimbabwean soldier beats a man in a street of Harare on August 1, 2018 as protests erupted over alleged fraud in the country’s election.One man was shot dead, AFP witnessed, after the Zimbabwean army opened fire in central Harare on Wednesday as protests erupted over alleged fraud in the country’s election. President Emmerson Mnangagwa on August 1 called for peace as police fired water cannon and teargas at opposition supporters in Harare over alleged fraud in Zimbabwe’s elections./ AFP PHOTO / Zinyange AUNTONY
Military tanks have also rolled on to Harare’s streets as protests rocked the Zimbabwean capital over disputed election results, reports ANA.
Tanks were seen rushing to the election command centre at Rainbow Towers Hotel in Harare, where presidential results are expected to be announced.


President Emmerson Mnangagwa on Wednesday called for peace as police had earlier fired water cannon and teargas at opposition supporters in Harare over alleged fraud in Zimbabwe’s elections.
“At this crucial time, I call on everyone to desist from provocative declarations and statements,” he said on Twitter. “Now is the time for responsibility and above all, peace.”


Zimbabwean anti riot police officers close the entrance to the Rainbow Towers where the election’s results were announced, as supporters of the opposition party Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), protest against alleged widespread fraud by the election authority and ruling party, in Harare, on August 1, 2018.Zimbabwe’s ruling ZANU-PF party won the most seats in parliament, official results showed on August 1, 2018, but EU observers criticised the Zimbabwe elections for being held on an “un-level playing field”. / AFP PHOTO / Luis TATO
The results of the Zimbabwe presidential election will also no longer be announced on Wednesday as planned.
It was reported that the Zimbabwean Electoral Commission (ZEC) said this was due to the fact that candidates had to be afforded an opportunity to verify the outcomes and follow certain processes.
The country’s commission said Thursday could be the day the results are announced and that a majority of the presidential results are at its national centre.
The commission’s chair, Priscilla Chigumba, was quoted as saying: “You actually have to go through a verification process. So you know the V11 forms we’ve been talking about on social media? You’ve got to sift through them and decide whether or not we actually agree with the tally that’s been done.
“We’re going to leave you with the anticipation sometime tomorrow.”


The polls — the first since autocratic president Robert Mugabe was forced out by a brief military takeover in November — had offered Zimbabwe the chance of turning the page on a brutal chapter of its past.
But the mood quickly descended into anger and chaos as supporters of the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) opposition declared they had been cheated.


“You said you were better than Mugabe — you are the picture of Mugabe,” shouted one young male protester wearing a white T-shirt. “We need security for the people.”
Official results showed that the ruling ZANU-PF party had easily won the most seats in the parliamentary ballot — strengthening Mnangagwa’s prospects of holding onto power in the key presidential vote.


MDC supporters burnt tyres and pulled down street signs as protests spread from the party headquarters in Harare.
“Now is the time for responsibility and above all, peace,” wrote Mnangagwa on his verified Twitter account.
“At this crucial time, I call on everyone to desist from provocative declarations and statements.”
MDC leader Nelson Chamisa, 40, said the presidential results were fraudulent.


“ZEC seeks to… reverse the people’s presidential election victory. The strategy is meant to prepare Zim mentally to accept fake presidential results,” he tweeted. “We won the popular vote and will defend it!”