Champion trainer Justin Snaith has a good chance to start the new season on a high note at Durbanville today when sending out some bright prospects on the eight-race card. 
One such is Richard Fourie’s mount Green Archer who contests Race 7 and top event, a MR 84 Handicap over 1600m.
This three-time winner struck top form in his last two outings over 1600m at Kenilworth, scoring smartly under 60kg in a MR 68 Handicap. Then carrying a similar weight and having the worst of the draw, the four-year-old ran on strongly from a slow start to win by an increasing length. With in-form Fourie aboard this time and dropping to 56kg, the gelding should complete the hat-trick.
Green Archer’s chances will probably be improved by the scratching of Gyre and Tsitsikamma Dance, but Loadshedder and Ben-Hur look best of the remainder.
Other Snaith-trained contestants worth following are Margrethe (Race 2), Forest Prince (Race 4) and Omega Force (Race 8).
Margrethe looks a standout bet in a Maiden Plate (F&M) over 1250m. This three-year-old was a runner-up on debut and followed up with a fourth over 1000m at Kenilworth again. The filly returns refreshed after a short break and with top-flight Fourie called on the combination is unlikely to miss.
One-time winner Forest Prince (Fourie) can defy top-weight in a 1250m MR 70 Handicap. This four-year-old was a bright second in his penultimate outing and followed up with another stout effort when coming from last out of 14 to finish a 1.55-length sixth over 1000m again. The extra distance should see the gelding in the winner’s enclosure this time.
Four-year-old Omega Force has been threatening a second win for a while but her turn could come this time when teamed up with Fourie in a MR 72 Handicap (F&M) over 1400m. This one-time winner has given an indication she will like the step up in distance and the booking of Fourie for the ride could see the filly repay her followers.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.