Some on Twitter have linked Donald Trump’s recent tweets about the land situation in South Africa to a white supremacist neo-Nazi website, InfoStormer. Our readers are warned that the site does include content some might find disturbing.
A tweet that went viral juxtaposes an article from the site titled South Africa Begins Seizing Land From White Farmers with Trump’s recent tweet about the land situation in SouthAfrica, where he said he would get US secretary of state Mike Pompeo to “closely study” the land situation here.
Trump also mentioned “land and farm seizures” and the “killing of farmers”.
Many have slammed his tweet, with the South African government calling it reckless.


While extremist white supremacist websites and news sources do certainly share the US president’s concern over the SA land situation, whether Trump’s views are informed directly by these sites is not known.
Rather, it is believed that his views may be more directly linked to a recent report on “land expropriations” (sic) in South Africa by Fox News host Tucker Carlson. Trump’s tweets came soon after a report on the matter by Carlson.

(function(d, s, id) {  var js, fjs = d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0];  if (d.getElementById(id)) return;  js = d.createElement(s); js.id = id;  js.src = 'https://connect.facebook.net/en_GB/sdk.js#xfbml=1&version=v3.1';  fjs.parentNode.insertBefore(js, fjs);}(document, 'script', 'facebook-jssdk'));

Carlson, who commands a massive audience of millions of followers on the conservative side of the US political spectrum, said in a report on Wednesday night that the South African Constitution had been changed to allow for land seizures targeting white people.Section 25 of the constitution has not yet been amended to allow for land expropriation without compensation.Carlson also called President Cyril Ramaphosa a “racist” and former us president Barack Obama a “coward.”

In a follow-up to his initial report on the South African land situation, Carlson in another report compared the current land situation in South Africa to apartheid.
South Africa is “once again becoming a place where an enitire  group of people is targeted for discrimination and violence based on their skin colour” according to Carlson.
Later in the report, Carlson calls the SA government “corrupt and incompetent,” and alleges that the policy of expropriation without compensation amounts to “collective punishment.”
“Nobody is alleging that individual farm owners in South Africa stole their land, instead the claim is that people who resemble them did and that’s enough.”
“If you got mugged, how would you feel about imprisoning someone who just happened to look like the mugger. How about the mugger’s children, should they be punished too?” Carlson asks.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.