Spanish police said Monday they have seized 67 kilogrammes (148 pounds) of cocaine found inside dozens of hollowed-out pineapples at Madrid’s main wholesale fruit and vegetable market.
The drug-stuffed fruits were found at the sprawling Mercamadrid market among a shipment of pineapples that arrived in the Portuguese port of Setubal by ship from Costa Rica and was then transported overland to the Spanish capital, police said in a statement.
Each pineapple was “perfectly hallowed out and stuffed with compact cylinders” containing 800-1,000 grammes cocaine and was coated with wax or yellow paraffin to conceal the “odours of the chemical products which the drug contains and avoid its detection”, the statement said.
READ MORE: Four bust with ‘cocaine’ worth millions at OR Tambo International Airport
Police arrested seven people as part of the operation – three in Madrid and four in Barcelona – who are suspected of playing a role in the cocaine smuggling operation.
Spain, with its historic and linguistic links to South America, is the main entry point to Europe for cocaine from the continent, mostly from Colombia.
Smugglers often resort to creative methods to get drugs past Spanish customs.
In recent years, police have found cocaine inside breast implants, a wig, a wheelchair cushion, a plaster cast encasing a man’s broken leg as well as inside a 42-piece crockery set.
This handout picture released on August 27, 2018 by Spanish National Police, shows a person holding a cocaine-stuffed pineapple, seized by Spanish police in Madrid.Spanish police said on August 27, 2018 they have seized 67 kilos (148 pounds) of cocaine found inside dozens of hollowed-out pineapples at Madrid’s main wholesale fruit and vegetable market. The drug-stuffed fruit was found at the sprawling Mercamadrid market in southern Madrid among a shipment of pineapples that arrived in the Portuguese port of Setubal by ship from Costa Rica and was then transported overland to Madrid, police said in a statement. Picture: AFP PHOTO.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.