Soldiers are reported to be circling Zimbabwe’s capital, Harare, telling vendors and other people that they have until noon to leave the city centre.
While it is not yet entirely clear when the electoral commission will announce the next set of results from Monday’s election, the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (ZEC) says it might announce the presidential vote results on Thursday at 9pm or on Friday, adding that it has until Saturday to do so.
Witnesses assert the death toll in post-election violence in Zimbabwe has risen to at least six people following clashes between protesters and Zimbabwe security forces, NewsDay reported on Thursday.
Members of the opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), angered at what they say are rigged election results, and Zimbabwean soldiers and police clashed in Harare.
NewsDay reported the city centre resembled a war zone, with soldiers driving in their armoured vehicles and indiscriminately firing live ammunition at anyone they found in the central business district, with several passersby caught in the crossfire.
While police have confirmed that three people died, witnesses claimed at least six people were shot dead.
The military was also reported to have opened fire at the residential home of MDC Zengeza West member of parliament Job Sikhale following skirmishes in the capital.
“Gunshots at my house as I speak. Family scared, but am reassuring them I’m prepared to die,” Sikhala posted on his blog.
Grandmother Sylvia Matambo, from Harare’s Waterfalls suburb and an employee of Zimbabwe National Water Authority, died after she was caught in crossfire and shot in the back.
Meanwhile, a senior official of MDC’s seven-party coalition, Tendai Biti, has agreed to hand himself over to the Zimbabwean police amid claims that he had incited violence and hatred during protests in Harare on Wednesday, which culminated in the army opening fire and killing three people.
Biti was finance minister in the 2009 to 2013 government, which saw Zanu-PF and opposition parties under the MDC alliance share power, and is said to be a respected politician in Zimbabwe.
Biti’s lawyer told SABC News: “Through a press conference by [a police inspector] the Zimbabwe Republic Police indicated that they are desirous of speaking to Tendai Biti.
“Be that as it may, I can confirm that Mr Biti will present himself to the police today at 2 o’clock.”
On Tuesday, Biti alleged at a press conference at MDC headquarters in Harare that the authorities were delaying the publication of results because MDC Alliance leader Nelson Chamisa had won the presidential election.
READ MORE: Zim’s MDC Alliance alleges electoral fraud, assassination orders
He addressed a media conference, saying the electoral body’s conduct was “totally unacceptable”.
“ZEC is taking its time to transmit results from polling stations to wards and to constituency centres, and this delay is totally unacceptable particularly in urban centres like Harare, Bulawayo, Gweru, Mutare and Masvingo,” he said.
Biti cited his own constituency, Harare East, as an example, saying despite the fact that they finished the whole process at 3am, ZEC had not pushed the results to the constituency command centre.
He added: “It is in this period of delay and uncertainty that merchants of chaos and bishops of electoral frauds will do their own things.”
The MDC Alliance called on ZEC to immediately comply with the law and start making formal declarations at constituencies as required.
Biti revealed the opposition had written to the electoral body asking them to produce the V11 forms. The V11 form summarises everything that would have taken place at a polling station.
“As we speak, it has been discovered that ZEC did not post V11 forms at 21% of the polling stations, and we are gravely concerned by their failure to do so,” he said.
Biti also claimed the opposition had received information that a senior Zanu-PF official had directed that he be assassinated together with MDC Alliance presidential candidate Nelson Chamisa.
Harare was calm on Thursday morning but Zimbabweans and international observers alike were on edge awaiting the results of its historic presidential election after troops opened fire on protests against alleged electoral fraud, denting hopes of a new era for the country following the ousting of Robert Mugabe.


The government late Wednesday vowed to enforce a security crackdown to prevent further unrest after the army opened fire to disperse opposition protests in Harare, leaving at least three people dead.


The Zimbabwe Republic Police (ZRP) invoked provisions of the Public Order and Security Act (Posa), as tensions escalated.
ZRP national spokesperson senior assistant commissioner Charity Charamba said Wednesday night that Police Commissioner-General Godwin Matanga had invoked provisions of Section 37 (1) of the Posa.


Posa was notoriously used by the administration of Mugabe to suppress dissent.
Charamba warned demonstrators against setting ablaze vehicles, assaulting vendors, taking their wares, damaging shops and conducting unlawful gatherings, saying law enforcement agents would arrest all of them.
She said the police had enlisted the services of the Zimbabwe National Army to restore order in the country.
Charamba said her boss Matanga had approached home affairs and cultural heritage minister Obert Mpofu to request the assistance of the Defence Forces for the suppression of the violence and disturbances in the capital central business district.
“The ZDF will remain under the command of the commissioner of the police,” she said.
Meanwhile, police are said to be looking for MDC Alliance leaders Tendai Biti and Happymore Chidziva for allegedly inciting demonstrations which turned violent.


Monday’s polls — the first since autocratic president Mugabe was forced out by a brief military takeover in November — had been meant to turn the page on years of violence-marred elections and brutal repression of dissent.
But the mood quickly descended into anger and chaos as supporters of the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) Alliance opposition declared they were being cheated in the election count.
“You said you were better than Mugabe — you are the picture of Mugabe,” shouted one young male protester wearing a white T-shirt. “We need security for the people.”
Soldiers fired on demonstrators during MDC protests in downtown Harare, AFP witnesses saw, with one man killed after being shot in the stomach.
Official results Wednesday showed that the ruling ZANU-PF party had easily won most seats in the parliamentary ballot — strengthening President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s prospects of holding on to power in the key presidential race.
MDC supporters, who say their leader Nelson Chamisa won the vote, burnt tyres and pulled down street signs as protests spread from the party headquarters in Harare.
Police confirmed the death toll of three, and Mnangagwa issued a statement blaming the opposition for the unrest and fatalities.
“We hold the opposition MDC Alliance and its whole leadership responsible for this disturbance of national peace,” he said, adding the government “went out of its way” to try to ensure the elections were peaceful.
Mnangagwa, 75, had promised a free and fair vote after the military ushered him to power in November when Mugabe was forced to resign.
In a late-night press conference, Home Affairs Minister Obert Mpofu warned that the government “will not tolerate any of the actions that were witnessed today.
“The opposition … have perhaps interpreted our understanding to be weak, and I think they are testing our resolve and I think they are making a big mistake.”
A credible and peaceful vote was meant to end Zimbabwe’s international isolation and draw in foreign investment to revive the shattered economy.
The MDC, which accuses the election authorities of falsifying results, said the army had opened fire “for no apparent reason” leading to the deaths of unarmed civilians.


MDC supporters, who say their leader Nelson Chamisa won the vote, burnt tyres and pulled down street signs as protests spread from the party headquarters in Harare.
Police confirmed the death toll of three, and Mnangagwa issued a statement blaming the opposition for the unrest and fatalities.
“We hold the opposition MDC Alliance and its whole leadership responsible for this disturbance of national peace,” he said, adding the government “went out of its way” to try to ensure the elections were peaceful.
The United States embassy called for security forces “to use restraint in dispersing protesters”, saying it was “deeply concerned by events” in the Zimbabwean capital.
Mnangagwa, 75, had promised a free and fair vote after the military ushered him to power in November when Mugabe was forced to resign.
A credible and peaceful vote was meant to end Zimbabwe’s international isolation and draw in foreign investment to revive the shattered economy.
The MDC, which accuses the election authorities of falsifying results, said the army had opened fire “for no apparent reason” leading to the deaths of unarmed civilians.
Former colonial power Britain on Wednesday also called for restraint in Zimbabwe after at least three people were killed when soldiers opened fire on crowds protesting alleged fraud in this week’s election.
Foreign office minister Harriett Baldwin said on Twitter that she was “deeply concerned” by the violence in Zimbabwe following the first nationwide vote since autocratic president Robert Mugabe was forced out by a brief military takeover in November.
“Call on Zimbabwe’s political leaders to take responsibility for ensuring calm & restraint at this critical moment. We’re continuing to closely monitor the situation,” she said.
Human rights group Amnesty International called on Zimbabwe’s authorities to launch “a prompt and effective” probe into the deadly military crackdown.
“The army’s conduct should be promptly investigated, with those responsible brought to justice,” said Colm O Cuanachain, Acting Secretary General of the London-based organisation.
“The militarization of the prevailing post-election environment is muzzling freedom of expression, association and assembly.
“People must be guaranteed their right to protest,” he added.
Monday’s polls had been meant to bring an end to years of violence-marred elections and brutal repression of dissent.


‘Un-level playing field’
European Union observers had earlier declared they found an “un-level playing field and lack of trust” in the election process. It called for transparency in the release of results.
“On many occasions — preparation, financing, media and hopefully not in the counting — it was advantageous for the ruling party,” EU chief observer Elmar Brok told AFP.
Under Mugabe’s 37-year reign, elections were often marred by fraud and deadly violence, with European Union observers banned since 2002.
The Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (ZEC) said Wednesday that of 210 parliamentary seats, 205 had been counted with ZANU-PF winning 144 and the MDC Alliance 61.
“The results are biased, trying to give the impression that ZANU has won,” said Lawrence Maguranyi, 21, an MDC supporter and university student protesting at the party headquarters.
MDC leader Nelson Chamisa, 40, said the presidential results were fraudulent.
“We have won this one together. No amount of results manipulation will alter your will,” he tweeted before the army were deployed.


Delayed results?
The electoral commission warned that final results of the presidential first round may not be known until Friday or Saturday.
Commission chairwoman Priscilla Chigumba, a high court judge, has flatly denied allegations of bias and strongly disputed accusations of rigging.
Mugabe, 94, voted in Harare on Monday alongside his wife Grace after he stunned observers by calling for voters to reject ZANU-PF, his former party.


His attempts to position Grace as his successor are widely thought to have driven the military to intervene and put their favoured candidate, Mnangagwa, in power.
Mnangagwa, Mugabe’s former right-hand man, was the clear election front-runner, benefitting from tacit military support and control of state resources.
But Chamisa, a lawyer and pastor who performed strongly on the campaign trail, sought to tap into the youth and urban vote.
He has repeatedly accused ZANU-PF and election authorities of trying to use a flawed electoral register and fixed ballot papers to steal the election.
Mnangagwa was allegedly involved in violence and intimidation during the 2008 elections when then opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai pulled out of the run-off after attacks claimed the lives of at least 200 of his supporters.
Earlier:
A Zimbabwean soldier beats a man in a street of Harare on August 1, 2018 as protests erupted over alleged fraud in the country’s election.One man was shot dead, AFP witnessed, after the Zimbabwean army opened fire in central Harare on Wednesday as protests erupted over alleged fraud in the country’s election. President Emmerson Mnangagwa on August 1 called for peace as police fired water cannon and teargas at opposition supporters in Harare over alleged fraud in Zimbabwe’s elections./ AFP PHOTO / Zinyange AUNTONY
Military tanks rolled on to Harare’s streets as protests rocked the Zimbabwean capital over disputed election results, reports ANA.
Tanks were seen rushing to the election command centre at Rainbow Towers Hotel in Harare, where presidential results are expected to be announced.


President Emmerson Mnangagwa on Wednesday called for peace as police had earlier fired water cannon and teargas at opposition supporters in Harare over alleged fraud in Zimbabwe’s elections.
“At this crucial time, I call on everyone to desist from provocative declarations and statements,” he said on Twitter. “Now is the time for responsibility and above all, peace.”


Zimbabwean anti riot police officers close the entrance to the Rainbow Towers where the election’s results were announced, as supporters of the opposition party Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), protest against alleged widespread fraud by the election authority and ruling party, in Harare, on August 1, 2018.Zimbabwe’s ruling ZANU-PF party won the most seats in parliament, official results showed on August 1, 2018, but EU observers criticised the Zimbabwe elections for being held on an “un-level playing field”. / AFP PHOTO / Luis TATO




MDC supporters burnt tyres and pulled down street signs as protests spread from the party headquarters in Harare.
“Now is the time for responsibility and above all, peace,” wrote Mnangagwa on his verified Twitter account.
“At this crucial time, I call on everyone to desist from provocative declarations and statements.”
MDC leader Nelson Chamisa, 40, said the presidential results were fraudulent.


“ZEC seeks to… reverse the people’s presidential election victory. The strategy is meant to prepare Zim mentally to accept fake presidential results,” he tweeted. “We won the popular vote and will defend it!”