The 61-member highly fractured opposition in Nelson Mandela Bay will be meeting at 7pm tonight in a last-ditch effort to iron out their differences ahead of tomorrow’s planned motion of no confidence vote against mayor Athol Trollip.
The Citizen understands that the ANC, African Independent Congress (AIC), United Front and United Democratic Movement (UDM) want to make peace between the Patriotic Alliance (PA) and EFF after the EFF called the PA a party of “thugs” and “unrepentant fraudsters” last week.
Some of the parties are unhappy that the EFF unilaterally declared they would not be supporting the outcome of a vote they lost at their own offices in Braamfontein. In the vote, all parties except the EFF had supported the PA’s councillor, Marlon Daniels, to be the next mayor, while the EFF supported the UDM’s Mongameli Bobani on Tuesday last week.
The PA last Wednesday said they were prepared to withdraw their candidate as mayor – but confusion about what the way forward will be in a possible post-Trollip government has once again placed the outcome on a knife-edge, with sources revealing that the PA could potentially scupper tomorrow’s no-confidence motion yet again.
Daniels said on Wednesday that their meeting tonight would discuss the “one-sided” fight of the EFF towards the PA, which is apparently all that now stands between Trollip’s survival or ousting.


Other factors such as one ANC councillor who is expected to have to return to prison soon and another who was in hospital this week with a serious medical condition may no longer have a bearing on the outcome.
The ill councillor is apparently out of hospital, or will be out of hospital by tomorrow, while Bongo Nombiba – who is reportedly taking his appeal attempt for his conviction and sentence on fraud and money laundering –straight to the Constitutional Court.
He is also likely to be in council tomorrow to vote despite Trollip’s agonised appeal to have him thrown back in jail.


Update: 17.35pm. Meanwhile, The Citizen has spoken to United Front councillor Khusta Mtsila, who insisted that their 7pm meeting would ask the parties to return to their original agreement that Daniels should be the mayor with Bobani as his deputy.
“There was a process,” said Mtsila. “The national leaders sat down and agreed after the vote. That was changed overnight. Who changed that? In which platform?
“If you are in a setup like ours where the majority has taken a position, you need to abide by the decision of the majority.
“If we don’t do that then we are already starting on the wrong note. So we will be insisting tonight that we go back to what was originally agreed at the EFF’s headquarters.”