A three-way conversation between ANC election head Fikile Mbalula, Democratic Alliance leader Mmusi Maimane and Western Cape Premier Helen Zille has prompted questions on Zille’s position following a racial video that went viral this week.
A tweet by Zille questioning why someone is describing “anything” they did not agree with as racist caught the attention of both Maimane and Mbalula who fired back.
Zille in her tweet wrote: “What total nonsense. You describe anything you don’t agree with as racist.”


Democratic Alliance leader Mmusi Maimane weighed in on the tweet, adding that Adam Catzavelo’s tweet took the country further away from building a nonracial South African for all.
“The comments by #AdamCatzavelo are abhorrent, racist and inconsistent with what South Africans from all races stand for. Racisms in all forms should never be tolerated in our society. It’s such actions, take us further away from the building a nonracial, 1 South Africa for all,” wrote Maimane.


Mbalula was quick on the qwerty and responded to Zille using Maimane’s words against the DA Western Cape premier stating that Zille’s comments were abhorrent, racist and inconsistent with what South Africa stood for.
“Comments by @helenzille are abhorrent, racist and inconsistent with what South Africans from all races stand for. Racisms in all forms should never be tolerated in our society. It’s such actions, take us further away from the building a non-racial.”
What could Zille mean by total nonsense?
The reaction from the trio comes after a viral video of businessperson Adam Catzavelos, who celebrated the lack of black people while on a beach front.
Catzavelos is trending on social media for his unpopular “weather forecast”.


This follows accusations against DA youth leader and campaign director Mbali Ntuli who took to Twitter to voice out her views after she was accused of a deafening silence over the Catzavelos video.
Ntuli blamed mental health issues for not being active on social media, sarcastically adding that she would put her depression on the back burner in the future.


For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.