Trevor Noah’s reputation took another hit this week after he compared the newly elected Pakistani politician Imran Khan, to America’s head of state – Donald Trump
Trevor made the comparison during one of his monologues on The Daily Show and the reaction to his joke wasn’t entirely positive.
The former cricketer is on the verge of being elected as Pakistan’s Prime Minister. During Tuesday’s episode of The Daily Show, Trevor drew parallels between Khan’s rise in popularity and Trump’s ascendance into power.
Trevor noted that both politicians came from privileged backgrounds, further aided by their celebrity status in their home countries. He also pointed out that they had both been accused of sexual misdemeanours in their careers (both of which did nothing to hamper their political aspirations – which is as much an indictment of society as it is of their respective morals and values).
Part of the monologue reads: “The more you look, the more you realise these similarities have spanned their entire lives. When Trump was doing Pizza Hut ads, Khan was in ads for Pepsi. Trump had three marriages in the tabloids, so did Khan. Trump thinks Islam is bad, Khan lives in Islamabad – I should have stopped while I was ahead but the rhythm kept me going. In fact, these guys are so alike that shortly before he was elected, Khan was also embroiled in a sexual harassment scandal. And just like Trump, he got through it.”
He continued: “Look, I’m not saying Imran Khan is the brown Trump. Imran Khan is one of many leaders around the world following the successful format of the hit show called The Trump Presidency, including apparently using the same writers.”
You can watch the segment below:


Trevor Noah’s comments were interpreted as “insensitive” by many quarters, and many of his viewers from around the world (and most notably Pakistan!) took to social media to give the comedian a piece of their minds.








This is not the first time in recent memory that Trevor Noah has found himself as the subject of people’s annoyance. Earlier this year he came under fire for comments that he made about Aboriginal women (although the comments were made in 2013) and the comedian was forced to issue an apology to the Aboriginal community.
Do you think Trevor Noah will have to apologise for his comments about Imran Khan?
Brought to you by All4Women