Coach Ottis Gibson said the Proteas leadership will be doing their best to help Kagiso Rabada literally channel his enthusiasm in the right direction following his successful appeal against his banning from the rest of the Test series against Australia on Tuesday.
International Cricket Council judicial officer Mike Heron downgraded Rabada’s punishment for brushing shoulders with Australian captain Steven Smith to a Level One offence, and only docked him one demerit point.
That means he is currently on seven points, below the threshold to be banned. But the fast bowler is just one point away from the suspension mark, so he clearly has to be very careful in the coming months.
“After six hours in the courtroom, as he called it, all KG wanted to do was practise. I had to force him to warm up because that’s how keen he was to get stuck in. So we don’t need to pump him up anymore. But he’s much aware of his on-field celebration, it’s just excitement and exuberance.
“It’s not bad behaviour and there is no aggressive intent, but he’s been made aware of his responsibilities and to respect the batsman’s space. He must carry on celebrating with the same passion, but he must just get away from the batsman.
“The Australians might try to get him into trouble again, but he’s a smart kid and a very strong character and I don’t expect him to make the same mistake again. Not having him available would be a big miss for the team, he’s too important not to be there. The number one bowler in the world being allowed to play is exciting for everyone concerned,” Gibson said at Newlands on Tuesday.
South Africa now go into the third Test, which starts on Thursday in Cape Town, with spirits high and with the momentum from their stirring triumph in Port Elizabeth, inspired by Rabada’s 11 wickets, to level the series.
Gibson said he hopes his team will be able to play with focused aggression.
“We got some momentum from the win in Port Elizabeth and KG being available has lifted everybody as well. So there’s a lot of positive energy in the camp and we must just make sure we channel it in the right direction. Australia have said they want to play against the best, so I’m sure they’re also delighted that Rabada is playing,” Gibson said.
ALSO READ: 
Rabada victory: It wasn’t just down to Dali Mpofu

For more sport your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.