The issue of churches in democratic South Africa is one that needs serious thought and conversation.
Something is amiss in how these churches conduct themselves, their free space and the reactionary stance that our law takes on the matters affecting our communities at large. What may start as a calling for some is seen as a gateway to riches for others.
Are we, as congregants, doing our due diligence on those whom we have entrusted with our spiritual health? These servants of God build mansions, drive sleek German machines and wear expensive timepieces, all from the hard work of their congregants and not really from prayer and faithfulness.
That people up and leave their homes to build a life around a family of “seven angels”, one of whom was a notorious criminal, beats me. How does one cash in their pension, withdraw their child from school and give their life’s earning to these “angels”?
We cannot even say that the church started off on the right note because the founder was fighting his own legal battles in criminal cases.
How do teachers, social workers and other professionals get led astray by people who have never seen the four walls of a classroom, people who claim to be heaven-sent?
We don’t know the real reasons why someone would blindly believe that the answer to whatever difficult situation they are going through lies in a solution sold on a church’s Facebook page.
South Africans need to stop being so gullible that people can use their minds and their desperation as the main ingredient in a get-rich-quick recipe.
How does it make sense that the congregants are living in absolute squalor while the church leadership drive German machines? People will die poor, with the smell of poverty permeating their homes, but with an A4 photo of their church leader hanging on the wall.
We are no longer being taught the word of God. We are being sold false promises and our faith is being used as weapon for personal wealth and development!
Kekeletso Nakeli-Dhliwayo.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.