The words equality, segregation and integration are arguably the most used. “Segregation” is the bad one in the context of our history and its association with the dreaded apartheid era during which the vote-less masses were cruelly treated. Clearly an unacceptable system of governance.
Black historian Carter G Woodson’s take on “equality” is reflective. He says no amount of legislation can grant you equality if you’re not valued.
Then there’s “integration”, the magic word that would lead us into the promised rainbow nation. The dictionary lists umpteen synonyms: combination, amalgamation, incorporation, unification, et al.
Now, my question: Given that South Africa consists of a diverse people clinging to different cultures, traditions and religions, what are the practical implications of realising a fully integrated nation under one roof?
And tribalism still exists among whites and blacks, each with their own values and way of life. The Indian and Chinese people, too, are locked into specific categories.
And within most of these groups, religion (again, in diverse forms) plays a major part.
In my book, where politicians have got it wrong is enforcing integration, telling the big lie that it’s the ultimate solution.
Another word, sorely ignored, is “tolerance”. In other words, appreciating and respecting each other’s way of life with all its quirks and failings.
Institutions like schools and universities, not unlike churches, mosques and synagogues, should be allowed to operate in the norms with which they’re familiar. Here language is also part of the equation.
This system is workable, unlike enforcing one set of rules for all. Present examples are proof of its failure.
Therefore, the word that should be shouted from the rooftops in our homes, educational and religious institutions is “tolerance”.
Nelson Mandela left us a graphic clue towards the rainbow. Remember, he visited Betsie Verwoerd (wife of apartheid’s creator) in Orania, the heart of Afrikanerdom.
He certainly didn’t approve of her philosophy, and she of his. But tolerance won the day.
Cliff Buchler.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.