South Africa’s newest fast bowling sensation, Lungi Ngidi, is unlikely to be dogged by the same disciplinary issues as Kagiso Rabada, simply because he is a very different character.
While Ngidi was preferred to Morne Morkel in Port Elizabeth, he is likely to team up with the lanky veteran in the third Test in Cape Town starting next Thursday.
But Ngidi brushes off any suggestions that he will be somehow replacing the suspended Rabada, even if he has had a much better start to his Test career than the world’s number one ranked bowler.
Ngidi’s five wickets at St George’s Park gave him a tally of 14 scalps in his first three Tests, while Rabada took just two wickets in his first three games, although, to be fair, those Tests were in India.
“I’m different to KG, I’m a lot more reserved. But you can be aggressive through your actions or what you say, or even in the areas that you bowl. I just try to have a presence, I don’t say much, but sometimes just a look is enough. But everything happens in the moment, some bowlers can’t hold back those emotions, they’re difficult to control. KG is an aggressive cricketer, he’s really competitive and that’s part of the game too.
“As far as the ICC goes, I have no say in what they do, but I’ve never seen a player banned for two matches before. But they are the judge, they make the final call, and who are we to say where the line is? I just take care of what I do on the field. But when I came into international cricket and saw the things that go on, I was taken aback,” Ngidi said.
While Rabada took a magnificent 11 wickets in the second Test against Australia, Ngidi proved an admirable foil for him, claiming important wickets in the first innings when he bowled both David Warner and Tim Paine, and then tying up an end in the second innings as he conceded just 24 runs in 13 overs, as well as taking two more wickets.
“It just felt great for me to get another opportunity, but they weren’t looking for me to predominantly take wickets at any stage. It was just about assessing the situation and not letting the batsmen get away.
“It was amazing to see KG bowl like he did and just to be out there when such great cricket was being played, it’s good to see. It also means that you know that it’s possible for you to do that and it gives you extra motivation to help at the other end, to keep applying pressure and see if you can take one or two wickets too,” Ngidi said.
* Meanwhile, the ICC confirmed that Rabada has indeed appealed his Level Two charge, which led to him being suspended for two Tests. The governing body said it will appoint a judicial commissioner in “due course”.
ALSO READ:
What makes KG special, according to Faf du Plessis

For more sport your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.