A 45-year-old man of Bronkhorstspruit accused of raping his parents’ domestic worker and forcing her to perform sexual acts on his dog says he wants to apply for bail and for the release of his two dogs that were confiscated by the police.
The man revealed his intentions for the two applications through his lawyer from legal aid, Ehleketani Maluleke, when he appeared in the Bronkhorstspruit Magistrate’s Court, east of Pretoria. His appearance today was for the court to get the DNA test results. The accused abandoned his bail bid during his second appearance in November last year.
State prosecutor Tiisetso Leballo told the court that DNA test results have been released pertaining to the accused and his 41-year-old alleged victim.
“The DNA test results for the dogs are still outstanding. The State opposes the accused’s application for the dogs to be released,” said Leballo. The two dogs were confiscated by the police late last year and are in the custody of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCA), added Leballo.
Magistrate David Shikwambana postponed the matter to March 19 for the accused to apply for bail. He said the accused could apply for the release of his dogs at a later stage after the bail application.
The man is facing 10 charges, including rape, sexual assault and malicious damage to property. He was arrested in November last year for allegedly raping the woman. The incident allegedly happened in Riamar Park, Bronkhorstspruit, on October 23. It is alleged the suspect dragged the woman into his room, where he attacked her and forced her to perform acts of bestiality with his dog.
A small crowd of people sang and danced outside the court during court proceedings today. Some of those dancing were wearing the attire of the African National Congress (ANC) and the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF).
– African News Agency (ANA)
Also read:
Boss accused of raping domestic worker, forcing her to perform bestiality appears

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.