Former president Jacob Zuma’s ‘War on Leaks’ project, launched in 2015 with the promise that it will produce 15 000 qualified artisans to help seal water leaks that cost the country R7 billion, has itself turned into a leaking pipe.
The Star reports that hundreds of youngsters meant to be trained through the R3-billion water project are sitting idle at home after an apparent bungle under former water and sanitation minister Nomvula Mokonyane’s watch.
It is estimated that more than 2 000 trainees are unable to complete their studies or find jobs because of mismanagement, with many trainees currently receiving stipends while at home and not doing any water-related work.
During its launch in Port Elizabeth, Zuma lamented that more than 20% of the country’s water supply went to waste and Rand Water was appointed as the agency implementing the project.
It is claimed that the mess has left the water entity unable to place artisans in either municipalities or private companies for practical training. One Mpumalanga youth said for the past 20 months, he has earned a R50 000 stipend while at home doing absolutely nothing.
RELATED: Magalies Water gets its financial services from company owned by former employee
It is reported that a further 414 youth across the country, earning stipends of between R2 000 and R2 500 a month, have been receiving payments since August 2015, according to the department of water and sanitation. From August 2016, 1 771 trainees have been receiving the same monthly grants.
According to the contract signed between trainees and the department, cited by the publication, the 2015 intake should have completed in 2016, with the last batch to join in 2016 expected to have commenced their practical training in July 2017.
The 2015 class is now facing the real risk of exiting the three-year training without qualifications, as they have not undergone the requisite practicals as a result of the contracts lapsing in August 2018.
“We cannot write out trade tests without practical experience of at least a year. One can only become a qualified artisan in the country after passing the trade test,” one disgruntled trainee said.
Rand Water spokesperson Justice Mohale reportedly referred all questions to the department of water and sanitation. Spokesperson Sputnik Ratau is said to have conceded that the failure to place trainees was a major problem and released the figures of those who were still not placed.
Ratau reportedly said the department was considering extending the contracts that were due to lapse in August. “This matter is still being looked into. This challenge was not foreseen, but will have to be resolved. Its resolution will form part of the lessons learnt going forward,” Ratau explained.
10 reasons rand picked up against the dollar, according to ‘Mama Action’