A senior member of the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation, more commonly known as the Hawks, today accused multinational retailer Steinhoff of “malicious compliance” of the law.
In a briefing to four parliamentary committees, the head of the Hawks’ specialised commercial crimes unit, Major-General Alfred Khana, contradicted Steinhoff officials who in January told MPs that they had reported former chief executive Markus Jooste to the investigative body for investigation and possible prosecution.
“To make it utterly clear, Steinhoff did not report this matter to the Hawks. Steinhoff gave us a section 34 report,” Khana told MPs, referring to section 34 of the Prevention and Combatting of Corrupt Activities act, which compels people in positions of authority who suspect wrongdoing to report the matter to authorities.
The report, said Khana, was “empty” and did not point specifically to anyone suspected of wrongdoing.
On January 31, Steinhoff acting chairwoman Heather Sonn told MPs that the chairman of the company’s audit committee, Steve Booysen, had reported Jooste to the Hawks.
“On the eve of the first appearance of Steinhoff before this committee, they dropped this report at our offices. When I saw the report, I was livid. This is malicious compliance in the utmost,” Khana told MPs, basically inferring that Steinhoff lied to MPs.
Steinhoff attorney Robert Driman denied the company was guilty of malicious compliance.
“If the impression was created that it was a cynical complaint, then I think it is the wrong impression,” said Driman.
“I think there had been three or four meetings with the investigating team and senior officials of Steinhoff. I’ve attended one of those meetings…and when it was drawn to the company’s attention that the general felt the report was made maliciously, the company wrote to him, invited him to be in touch…”
But MPs did not buy this, accusing Steinhoff of “delaying tactics”, with one MP proclaiming “we are being played”.
The four parliamentary committees (finance, public accounts, trade and industry, and public service and administration) urged Steinhoff to cooperate with the Hawks.
 
The Steinhoff scandal, brought on by “accounting irregularities”, wiped billions of rand of government pension funds invested through asset manager, the Public Investment Corporation (PIC).
– African News Agency (ANA)
Also read:
Former Steinhoff CEO Markus Jooste given 10 days to appear before Parliament

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.