More allegations of fraud against a Centurion husband and wife have surfaced after a woman claimed the couple owes her R160 000, Centurion Rekord reports.
The woman, who chose to remain anonymous, said she is a former employee who never got paid.
READ MORE: Pretoria business owner defrauded of R300k
“I consulted a lawyer to take them to court, but gave up when it became a financial burden,” she told the Centurion Rekord.
She said the couple hired about 300 people for an alleged mining contract, but that they abruptly “became silent on matters”.
According to the woman, the husband and wife owe these employees money as well.
“They just do not care what they do to hardworking people and nobody is doing anything about it,” the woman claimed.
“We wanted to start a class action, but the people do not have the money for lengthy court procedures.”
The Centurion Rekord previously reported that the husband is a convicted fraudster currently out on parole, and that both husband and wife are being investigated by two police stations in the metro for possible fraud.
The department of correctional services in Pretoria is yet to decide whether an arrest warrant would be issued for the parolee or not.
Correctional services spokesperson Mocheta Monama said “matters are being looked at internally”.
Monama earlier confirmed the husband was serving a sentence for fraud and forgery.
The man and his wife are accused of being involved in several scams.
With one scam, the pair pretended to be financing used or new vehicles for clients with poor credit records. The couple would then simply disappear without any deposits paid.
Two such cases were reported. One is being investigated by the Lyttelton police and the other by the Villieria police.
Lyttelton police spokesman Captain Dave Miller said the case was still under investigation.
“The police would like to encourage anyone with information to contact the investigating officer,” said Miller.
Villieria police spokesperson Captain Coba Brits said all statements regarding the investigation have been obtained and sent to court.
Brits said the court sent the statements to their commercial branch for investigation and a decision.
“If the commercial branch decides that prosecution will follow on the statements received, they will issue a summons to appear in court,” said Brits.
Pretoria business owner defrauded of R300k

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.