President Cyril Ramaphosa arrived in Kagili, Rwanda, on Tuesday where he is leading the South African delegation to the 10th Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and Government of the African Union (AU), the Presidency said.
AU chairperson and Rwanda President Paul Kagame gave a strong indication that member states will sign the treaty to create the continental free trade area even if the continent’s most populated country, Nigeria, withdraws from the meeting.
At least 53 African Heads of States have gathered in Kigali for the 10th Extraordinary Summit of the AU to consider the legal instruments of the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCTA) and also launch the agreement officially to establish the treaty.
AfCTA is aimed at deepening African economic integration, promoting agricultural development, food security, industrialisation and structural economic transformation through single-air continental transport market with free movement of persons, capital, goods and services.
The Presidency said that Ramaphosa will on arrival pay a courtesy call on Kagame, participate as a panellist in a business forum that forms part of the Summit programme and attend a welcome dinner hosted by Kagame to honour visiting heads of state and government.
On Wednesday, Ramaphosa will attend the opening ceremony of the Summit and will deliver a statement to the Summit in his capacity as chair of the Southern African Development Community (SADC).
Over the past three days, an extraordinary session of the executive council has deliberated on the AfCFTA legal instruments and launch the agreement establishing the AfCFTA.
South Africa is committed to the establishment of an AfCFTA that will boost intra-Africa trade in accordance with the aspirations of the African Union’s Agenda 2063.
However, Nigeria President Muhammad Buhari withdrew his participation from the Summit at the weekend and did not travel to Kigali, saying that continental aspirations must complement Nigeria’s national interests.
Last week, Nigeria’s Cabinet endorsed the AfCTA.
“As Africa’s largest economy and most populous country, we are committed to ensuring that all trade agreements we sign are beneficial to the long-term prosperity of the continent,” Buhari said in a statement.
“We are therefore widening and deepening domestic consultations on the CFTA, to ensure that all concerns are respectfully addressed. Any African Free trade agreement must fairly and equitably represent the interests of Nigeria, and indeed, her African brothers and sisters.”
Despite this setback in Africa trade integration, Kagame appeared unfazed on Tuesday when he delivered the keynote address at the opening of the Summit, saying that the treaty would be signed on Wednesday.
“Tomorrow, we will sign a historic agreement creating a Continental Free Trade Area. The road to this point has been long indeed. It can be measured in decades. And we still have a few more steps to take. But we are persisting, and a new chapter in the story of African unity is set to begin,” Kagame said.
“The stakes are enormous for Africa, but also for the entire global economy, to which Africa will contribute an ever-greater share in the decades ahead.
“The creation of one African market necessarily entails a metamorphosis in how we think and act. The full involvement of the private sector is needed more than ever before. The purpose of today’s forum is to discuss how to make the most of the new opportunities we are creating for ourselves.”