I don’t go to church often. I believe I don’t have many sins but I just forgive myself for the minor ones I have.
Let’s be clear: I don’t believe I’m without any vices. Let me count the ways: I smoke. I tend to get grumpy at times. Sometimes I braai on gas. I may or may not have hidden Snapdragon’s broom to force her to take the car to work on several occasions.
I have been known to write impolite e-mails to people who rub me up the wrong way.
And once I looked the other way when an old lady tried to cross the street. Only once.
But I have my good points, too. I have supported the Springboks for decades and with the brand of rugby they have played over the past few seasons, loyalty like that has to count for something.
Of course, the lovely Snapdragon doesn’t agree. “You’re always an idiot and in addition to that, you’re sometimes a jerk,” she is known to say to her caring and self-sacrificing dear husband.
Unlike myself, I think a series of confessions at the local Catholic church won’t do her any harm. There are times when it can mean the world to a person to look into herself.
A few weeks ago, after the announcement of the Cabinet, I got the impression Uncle Cyril is going to let bygones be bygones.
But after this week, I believe Snapdragon might just be in good company if she takes the time for some introspection.
Take Tom Moyane, for example. Uncle Cyril has suspended him and he will have lots of time for introspection in the foreseeable future.
I’m positive he may be joined by several other high-flyers soon.
Call me naive, but I have a sincere hope that the new broom won’t stop with Moyane.
Or Sars.
Or any part of government that is related to departments that have a direct influence on investment in our country.
Because a clean and corruption-free government which rules over happy, healthy and well-educated citizens is about much more than investor confidence.
With all the corruption and state capture that has tainted the past decade, it might just be the time for a post-apartheid TRC.
Of course I won’t testify. I’m at peace with my harmless little vices.
They are, after all, my only defence against boredom.
Dirk Lotriet. Picture: Alaister Russell
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.