The Democratic Alliance (DA) is finalising the terms of reference on a full-scale inquiry into the disastrous affairs of the department of water and sanitation, the party said.
“This is most welcome in light of media reports today that the R3-billion project, launched in 2015 under the watch of the Minister of Water and Sanitation, Nomvula Mokonyane, meant to empower and equip our youth with critical skills is being plagued by gross mismanagement,” a DA statement reads.
The organisation said the project was meant to produce 15 000 qualified artisans over a three-year period.
“It is disheartening that the over 2 000 trainees are unable to complete their studies or find jobs because of gross mismanagement at the department,” the DA said.
It added that Rand Water must also be held equally responsible for any role the entity may have played in the matter, as it had been entrusted with implementing the project on behalf of the department.
“While President Cyril Ramaphosa has sent Minister Mokonyane to the Communications Department, the Water and Sanitation Department continues to deteriorate due to her legacy of mismanagement and alleged corruption, which has left the Department totally bankrupt,” the party said.
The DA said decisive action must be taken against Mokonyane, and it stated it would ensure she was held accountable.
“This is a direct indictment on Minister Mokonyane and entire ANC government, which has continually detached itself from the plight of our people who don’t have access to clean water.
“Minister Mokonyane is not fit-for-purpose for any position in which her priority should be to serve and empower ordinary South Africans.
“The DA strongly urges President Ramaphosa to take strong action against Minister Mokonyane and prove to South Africans that he’s serious ending corruption that is the biggest in the impediment to the service delivery,” the statement reads.
Mokonyane gets legal advice on powers of SABC board to appoint executives

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.