The DA is at a crossroads ahead of its federal congress next week as it has to deal with the race and the land issues in a manner that satisfies its black membership.
Former party leader Tony Leon believed these were not insurmountable problems. He is optimistic the April 7 to 8 federal congress, one of the most critical in the DA’s history, would find solutions that accommodate all members.
But political analyst Dumisani Hlophe said the DA was bedevilled by its white history.
“The DA has two fundamental problems: race and its stance on land redistribution. The party went all out to recruit blacks, but was unprepared for the fact that they would want to be in the top leadership and decision-making structures.”
He said the DA appeared to be unable to adjust its policies and party structures to accommodate everybody. But black members would demand more than cosmetic representation, including in the federal council.
They also expected the party to be sympathetic to their plight of poverty, unemployment, inequality and landlessness. The DA favours individual property ownership and is opposed to land expropriation.
Hlope said the party would have to allow more black representation in crucial structures as a clash was already under way between a core bloc of conservative whites who wanted to retain the white-dominated status quo and black members who wanted change.
“There is a serious race problem in the party,” Hlophe said. “The DA cannot isolate itself from race and land issues or it will face a backlash from its black voters. Its challenge is how it handles these matters.”
Black grassroots members believed the party structure did not accommodate them, he added. “The DA never changed its institutions to allow for growth and it’s coming back to haunt them.”
However, Leon said: “I am certain the DA can achieve a sensible accommodation allowing all its representatives, members and voters to see themselves as having a voice in proceedings and outcomes.”
– ericn@citizen.co.za