It’s been a week since the Proteas wrapped up their victory in the second Test against Australia at St George’s Park and Dean Elgar has used the “break” fully.In fact, it’s allowed him and the rest of his teammates to actually take stock of that excellent performance when it’s far easier to dwell on the ongoing Kagiso Rabada saga.“There’s been so much noise that people have actually forgotten there is such a great Test series happening between two strong and competitive teams,” South Africa’s left-handed opener and vice-captain said on Monday.Both teams are in Cape Town for the decisive third Test starting at Newlands on Thursday.The Proteas have made a point since assembling again of not discussing the Rabada issue.His appeal hearing commenced at 09:00 on Monday and concluded just after 15:15.Mike Herron, the ICC’s judicial officer, now has 48 hours to deliver a verdict.“We haven’t even spoken about it since we got together. We’re trying to isolate ourselves from that situation,” said Elgar.“As players we don’t have influence over what has happened in the hearing or what could happen. But it would be nice to put it behind us. Whether KG is playing in the third test or not, it’s out of our hands. Hopefully we can put this behind us and carry on playing cricket.”However, the 30-year-old isn’t oblivious to the hole Rabada – who took 11 wickets in Port Elizabeth – will leave if his sentence is upheld.“Having him in the side is massive for us. It’s massive for the game. It’s massive for the format. Because KG is an extremely special cricketer,” said Elgar.“We know there are rules that are implemented for certain instances and we as cricketers respect that. If he’s good to go for the third Test it would be awesome for us and for the game.”On a personal level, Elgar wants to handle the spin of Nathan Lyon better.He’s been dismissed twice by the off-spinner, both caught-and-bowled opportunities.“I have handled him quite poorly,” Elgar said.“Like I said, silly dismissals that are uncharacteristic of me. In the past I have handled him quite well. He has developed his game massively in the last two years, and I will just be mindful of that and still trust my defence against him.”ALSO READ:https://citizen.co.za/sport/south-africa-sport/sa-cricket-sport/1861197/cricket-needs-kg-rabadas-spunk-says-aussie-legend/For more sport your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.