National Police Commissioner, General Khehla John Sitole, has called for calm in Umlalazi, Eshowe and surrounding areas in KwaZulu-Natal after residents embarked on a protest when a 30-year-old man was killed and a sugarcane plantation and farmhouse set alight.
Sitole called on residents to be calm and tolerant.
“Yesterday, two young men, one of them being 30-year-old Spamandla Xulu, were fishing in a dam on the Gqobhokani farm. The men were confronted by a security guard and requested to leave which resulted in an altercation that led to the guard allegedly fatally shooting Mr Xulu. The second man escaped uninjured,” the South African Police Services (Saps) said in a statement.
“Since the shooting of Mr Xulu, the security guard has been arrested on a charge of murder and he is currently in police custody. However, the community is alleged to have taken to the streets initially burnishing tyres on the R66 road followed by the burning of the farmer’s house at the Gqobhokani farm, his sugarcane plantation as well as at least two neighbouring plantations.”
Sitole said the man who allegedly shot Xulu was arrested and called on residents to allow the law to take its course.
“I have tasked to Provincial Commissioner to also mobilise an investigative task team to investigate the burning of the farm house and farms and bring those responsible to book as such behavior is criminal and unacceptable,” Sitole said in the statement.
He said Public Order Police Unit, Tactical Response Team and members of the local police stations have been mobilised to stabilise and normalise the area.
“Destroying property is no solution to any problem but rather it is a crime which is punishable by law. Furthermore, It serves to neither help nor correct any situation.”
Meanwhile, the African National Congress (ANC) in the province expressed concern about the unrest and violence in the area.
In a statement, the party said it was worried about the “brutal murder of Xulu as it believes that arresting him would have been a proper reaction to whatever crime he is alleged to have committed”.
They said the disruption to the lives of other residents and the closure of the R66 Road was also concerning.
“To resort to violence and the destruction of property is not a solution. We call upon the people of Umlalazi to remain calm and place their hope and faith in the hands of the law enforcement agencies who are on the ground to ensure that order prevails.”
– African News Agency (ANA)
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.