Pantsuits, black dresses and feathered accessories are amongst the predicted bridal trends for 2018.
The news comes courtesy of the global fashion search platform Lyst, whose 2018 Wedding Fashion Report identify the five key trends we can expect to see in the bridalwear industry this year.
Daring 
The platform found that brides are set to break from tradition in the coming months – at least, if the 113% increase in searches for bridal pantsuits and bridal suits over the last year is anything to go by.



A post shared by Grace Loves Lace (@grace_loves_lace) on Jan 31, 2018 at 12:22pm PST



Wedding dress searches including the words ‘backless’, ‘sexy’ or ‘nude’ have also doubled year on year, suggesting that daring styles are becoming increasingly the norm.
Budget-friendly
Women are spending less than previous years on wedding dresses, thanks to the increasing number of budget-friendly options from brands such as Topshop, ASOS and Reformation.



A post shared by Little Chapel In-The-Woods (@littlechapelinthewoods) on Feb 12, 2018 at 8:56am PST



While the average price of a wedding gown on Lyst was £832 (approximately R13 700) last year, the current average is just £790 (approximately $13 000).
Designer dresses
US actress Meghan Markle is expected to have a big impact on the industry this year, thanks to the fervor surrounding her own upcoming high-profile nuptials with Britain’s Prince Harry, scheduled for May.
The labels rumored to be in the running for the creation of her dress, such as Erdem, Ralph & Russo and Misha Nonoo, have all seen a significant increase in searches on Lyst.
Colours
Why wear ivory when you could wear … pink?



A post shared by Bridal Musings Wedding Blog (@bridalmusings) on Jan 21, 2018 at 7:12am PST



The report found that colour will play a key part in 2018 weddings, and although traditional white gowns remain the most popular choice, searches for rose-colored gowns come in at second place, followed by yellow and red.
Searches for ‘black bridal dresses’ have also increased 18% year on year.
Retro
Finally, expect to see a few retro touches if you are attending a wedding anytime soon – 1920s bridal accessories are back in fashion, with sales of hair clips and headpieces increasing by 39% over the last year.



A post shared by Paula (@rose_red_accessories) on Mar 15, 2018 at 4:39am PDT



Lyst also notes that there are 24% more feathered bridal products on its site than at this time last year, hinting that whimsical, fun accents are back in style. As they say, it is all in the details.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.