Gauteng Premier David Makhura will meet with the mayor of Johannesburg, Herman Mashaba, today to discuss the possible rate hikes resulting from the recent property valuations.
The recent revaluations of properties in Johannesburg have elicited major concerns among the city’s ratepayers and property owners.
“On Wednesday, I took an extraordinary step to intervene in the current property rates crisis in the City of Johannesburg by requesting a meeting with Mayor Mashaba so that he can come and explain what the City is doing to resolve the concerns of residents,” Makhura said.
Makhura has also taken note of the media statement attributed to Mashaba in which he suggests the premier does not understand the facts nor the unprecedented measures being undertaken.
“This is very unfortunate, as it smacks of either arrogance or total denialism of a real crisis that has irked Joburg residents who are deeply concerned and angered by the mayor’s dismissive and arrogant attitude,” he said.
The premier added Mashaba continued to think that anyone questioning the “irrational” and “inexplicable” proposed property rates hike was either stupid or spoilt.
He said he had been receiving complaints from residents and businesses who feared the rates hike would put a major strain on their finances.
Officials from the provincial department of cooperative governance and traditional affairs (Cogta) have met with officials from the City and expressed concerns about the process followed in this year’s valuation.
Makhura was briefed about the outcome of the meeting.
“I still find the city’s response to the crisis wholly inadequate because it is based on denialism of the extent of the crisis,” he said.
The premier indicated in his state of the province address (Sopa) that Gauteng residents were under enormous financial pressure, with the costs of food, transport and electricity being too high.
In light of this, the National Treasury has already indicated its willingness to look into the list of food items earmarked for zero rating on the value added tax (VAT).
The meeting with Mashaba was scheduled to take place at 2pm this afternoon.
Makhura also intends to meet with concerned Johannesburg residents and business owners to hear their views.
He called on all involved in the process to act in the best interests of the ratepayers.
Extension on lodging complaints about sky-high property evaluations

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.