With the last of the disciplinary hearings now hopefully out of the way, Proteas captain Faf du Plessis said on Wednesday that he is determined to make a big statement with the bat in the third Test between South Africa and Australia that starts at Newlands on Thursday.
In a fractious series that has required all of Du Plessis’ diplomacy and his presence in numerous meetings, culminating in what Kagiso Rabada called his appearance in “court” this week, the captain has scored just 30 runs in four innings (one of them not out) in this epic rubber.
Since scoring a superb double of 63 and 48 against India on an unpredictable Centurion pitch, Du Plessis has a highest score of just 15 in his last six innings and recognises that it’s time for him to contribute more with the bat.
“It does take a lot of time [dealing with all the hearings] but I see it as part of my role, to stand by the team, to back up my players and show that I am there with them. But it is crucial as captain to find a couple of minutes of your own space. But there are no worries, I’m used to that and I enjoy the challenge.
“Forgetting the captaincy for a bit, it is important to make runs though, that’s still my most important job. The Aussies have kept me quiet so far, so I’m very motivated to make a big play. In a series like this you need your senior players to stand up and AB, Hash and Dean have done that in the previous Tests. Hopefully I can now come up with a big play in this game,” Du Plessis said at Newlands on Wednesday.
The captain said their selection issues heading into the crucial third Test were limited to whether to go into battle with Theunis de Bruyn or Temba Bavuma in the number six spot, and whether to back up Rabada and Vernon Philander with Lungi Ngidi or Morne Morkel in the pace department.
“It’s a nice decision to have to make and Lungi and Morne have different strengths so it’s about who will be better in the conditions. Lungi bowled really well in the previous game, but he has a bit of a toe problem, which is bothering him and keeping him back a bit, so it becomes a very easy decision if he’s not 100% fit.
“Morne is a very fit bowler who can bowl long spells, which is especially important if we go in with three seamers and a spinner, we want the guys who have a lot of overs in the bank. Morne is also a fantastic bowler of course and it would be nice for him to get a chance to get to 300 wickets,” Du Plessis said.
Bavuma has not played a professional match since January 17 due to a fractured finger, but Du Plessis said his lack of competitive cricket did not necessarily rule him out of a return at Newlands.
“It’s different for batsmen. Ideally you would like him to have a couple of games, to get time in the middle and get back into form. But it’s going to be more mental for Temba, he looks good in the nets and his hand has fully recovered. We have a lot of confidence in him.
“Even though Temba has not played a lot of cricket, he’s a high-quality batsman and that’s still there. Plus Newlands has been a good ground for him,” Du Plessis said.
ALSO READ:
We’ll keep Kagiso Rabada in check, says Ottis Gibson