ANC secretary general Ace Magashule has announced that the heads of organising, elections, political education and cadre development will be deployed to the party’s headquarters on a permanent basis.
Magashule said this was a resolution taken at the party’s 53rd and 54th conference and through this deployment the party’s capacity  to execute its tasks will be strengthened.
He said the chairperson of organising is Senzo Mchunu, who lost the race for the secretary general position to Magashule during the conference last year, head of elections is Fikile Mbalula who was axed as Minister of Police this week, head of the presidency is Zizi Kodwa, and Dakota Legoete is going to work closely with Mchunu.
“And our general manager who is going to ensure that the ANC is organised and efficient and modernised and professional is comrade Febe Potgieter, and then we also have comrade Mdu working at head office to ensure that  our coordination of the ANC and NWC work is granted,” Magashule said.
Magashule also announced that Febe Potgieter-Gqubule has resigned from the SABC board to take up her new position at Luthuli House.
Mchunu said the party does not believe the creation and filling of these positions will lead to an overlapping of roles and confusion.
“We do not see a stampede or possible stampede in terms of work that we need to do at head office happening. We see ourselves assembled as a team,” Mchunu said.
He added that due to the party’s growth and current size it requires a specialised and modernised way of functioning.
“The ANC has seen it wise that it should make sure that it functions up to that level and up to its own expectations … and up to the expectations of South Africans,” Mchunu said.
Magashule’s deputy, Jessie Duarte said the permanent posts are not redundant, dispelling notions that Mchunu’s role is the same as that of the secretary general, saying that each appointee has specific duties.
Duarte further said the leadership of the party stands as a team and not as contestants competing over positions within the organisation.
She said all posts are permanent positions at the party’s headquarters and that those occupying them will receive remunerations, but she added that receiving a salary is not a motivating factor behind taking up the positions but rather it is the commitment of each appointee to serve the party which drives them.
Don’t panic over land expropriation – ANC leaders

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.