The Democratic Alliance in North West will support the EFF in the motion of no confidence in Premier Supra Mahumapelo next month, provincial leader Joe McGluwa said on Friday.
“After his alleged secret visit with [former president] Jacob Zuma, we are convinced, more than ever, that he is not fit to lead this province. We suggest he does the honourable thing and resign from his position now,” McGluwa said.
He said the people of North West had no faith or trust in the the leadership of Mahumapelo, who is from the African National Congress, or his ability to help lift the community out of economic hardship.
“His affiliation with Zuma is worrying and we know neither Zuma nor the Guptas care about the plight of the people in our province. To them, North West was a playground to gather tenders.”
There were reports that Mahumapelo held a secret meeting with Zuma on Thursday, in Mahikeng, but his spokesperson Brian Setswambung said Mahumapelo spent Thursday in Haartbeespoort Dam in a meeting with the VTSD advisory council.
McGluwa said it would be a disgrace if Mahumapelo survived the no confidence motion, which was tabled by the Economic Freedom Fighters and is scheduled to be debated on April 17.
The ANC said it was not worried about the motion.
“We are confident that our Members of Provincial Legislature [MPLs] – as deployees of the ANC will vote against such a motion against our democratically elected premier of Bokone Bophirima [North West],” said provincial spokesperson Gerald Modise.
“The ANC has got its own way of doing things and if the movement has got concerns about its deployee, we will follow our own internal process to address such concerns.”
Public service unions – the National Education, Health and Allied Workers Union (Nehawu), the Democratic Nursing Organisation of SA (Denosa) and the Health and the Services Personnel Trade Union of SA (Hospersa) – marched to the provincial legislature on Tuesday, demanding that Mahumapelo resigns within 14 days as premier.
The African National Congress Women’s League in North West said the call for Mahumapelo to resign was cheap politicking.
“We frown upon these calls as they’re not genuine, but political manoeuvers by those who seek nothing but political self-preservation,” said provincial secretary Bridgette Tlhomelang.
“While the ANC Women’s League agrees that corruption is a cancer that must be defeated for our society to prosper, we think it’s rather low for comrades who are in alliance with our movement – the ANC – including workers’ unions affiliated to our alliance partner Cosatu, to make it their mission to tarnish an ANC leader’s name without any court process finding him guilty.”
She said none of those calling for Mahumapelo to resign have produced any evidence that linked him to corrupt activities.
Meanwhile the ANC Youth League in North West distanced itself from the “Hands Off Mahumapelo” march on Thursday, though it was organised under its name.
“The ANCYL in the North West province has been made aware of the protest action organised by a group of people under the banner of the ‘ANCYL NW’, we want to make it clear that some organisers of this protest action are suspended members from the ANCYL and are still serving their suspension,” said provincial spokesperson Tshiamo Tsotetsi.
“Our posture on corruption in the province is clear and it is not one that seeks to defend anyone who is alleged to be a role player in corrupt activities, we care less if such a role player is MEC, head of department or premier. It is for that reason we will not embark on any campaign calling for ‘hands off’ against the possible looters of public money.”
-African News Agency (ANA)
Mahumapelo purchases 274 tablets for workers, denies ‘dumping’ money on them