Friends and family of late struggle icon Ahmed Kathrada gathered at Westpark Cemetery yesterday morning to commemorate the first anniversary of his death.
Kathrada’s niece, Zohra Kathrada-Ariengton, who worked closely with him for six years, burst into tears as she told The Citizen there’s been a huge gap in the family since his death.
“It’s been a year and seems like the other day that we were together. We [the Kathrada family] will continue to uphold and respect his values. We want him to know that we miss him terribly. He always said when it’s his time to go, he’ll be with the A-team in heaven. With Tata Madiba, Tata Sisulu, and now he’s smiling down at us today.”
Also, in attendance was anti-apartheid activist Sophie de Bruyn, who took the opportunity to speak about the open letter Kathrada wrote about his disappointment in then-president Jacob Zuma.
“We all remember the very famous letter that he wrote for the previous president to resign, because he was very displeased and disappointed [with] what was happening in our country and the road it was taking. And here we are today, under a new administration and therefore I’m saying he must be in his element.”
She said in honour of his memory, South Africans should work hard together and uphold the values that he stood for.
Anti-aparthrid veteran Dr Essop Jassat says a prayer at the gravesite of Ahmed Kathrada on 28 March 2018. Picture: Tracy Lee Stark
In attendance to pay their respects and share their memories of Kathrada were important international guests, including the ambassador of Algeria in South Africa, Abd-El-Naceur Belaid.
“We know him as one of the great symbols of the struggle of the people of South Africa, for freedom and democracy and justice. We followed the likes of Kathrada, Nelson Mandela and the other leaders of your people and your nation,” he said. “For us, Ahmed Kathrada was and is a symbol of courage, dignity, humanity and we hope that his legacy will continue to be celebrated and honoured, not only in South Africa but also in [the rest of] Africa.”
Ingrid Gruen, who sang a song called Siyabonga (Thank you in Zulu), said her greatest regret was not knowing Kathrada as well as the other guests did.
“This wonderful country is all of us, past, present and future. I humbly ask everybody to follow the example of a great man with humility,” she said.
– jenniffero@citizen.co.za
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.