When cricket historians look back on the tumultuous series between South Africa and Australia in 2018, they will no doubt consider how the careers of a couple of superstars were changed and how the game itself changed.
There will hopefully be some positives to come out of all this hurt and angst – and who could not be touched by the images of Steven Smith breaking down in Sydney or the coach Darren Lehmann’s tearful resignation at the Wanderers on Thursday.
But when the dust has settled and this series’ place in cricket history is considered, hopefully the tremendous leadership skills of Proteas captain Faf du Plessis will also be acknowledged.
While his counterpart Smith, five years his junior, was succumbing to the pressure and all the feelings of being wronged that Australia seemed to focus on, and gave his ear to the poisonous ideas of David Warner, Du Plessis has managed to keep his team largely on the right side of the line and focused on the field of play.
They have played some stirring cricket since going 1-0 down in Durban and now stand poised to make history with a series win over Australia when the final Test starts at the Wanderers on Friday.
While he has undoubtedly been superb in controlling emotions in the Proteas changeroom, Du Plessis has also been outstanding in his dealings with the voracious media contingent that has followed this series, and which has grown accustomed to being fed fresh, raw meat every day.
His performance in the traditional pre-Test captain’s press conference on Thursday was magnificent.
In a 22-minute event, he advised the International Cricket Council on the direction their wide-ranging review of player behaviour, the spirit of the game and the code of conduct should go; he expressed his heartfelt compassion for what Smith is going through and his harsh punishment; was diplomatic in discussing Australia’s approach to the game; reflected on his own mistakes; admitted they had suspicions the visitors had been ball-tampering before Newlands.
He even had time to discuss the actual cricket that will start on Friday.
Du Plessis confirmed that South Africa would play the same team as in Cape Town, largely because the Wanderers pitch is a lot dryer than usual, brown-tinged rather than green, and could turn and provide inconsistent bounce when days four and five arrive.
The gist of Du Plessis’ comments were that the way New Zealand play the game should be exported around the world.
“I think the ICC review is overdue. Two years ago when I was in Australia and ‘Mintgate’ happened, I felt then that there was no clarity, the players didn’t know what is allowed and what they can’t do, there were grey areas and that leads to a lot of things happening. The rules needed to be clearer and then the players would better understand them. But there are a lot of grey areas, also in terms of the penalties. So it is good that the ICC are thinking that way and will have a full review.
“I think sledging should be one of the things they discuss because I don’t think it has much influence in the way it makes people play, even though in the past people thought it did. Maybe a few guys will feel a bit more pressure, but for me it just motivates me.
“I don’t feel that the boundaries have been pushed a lot in this series, you expect it from Australia, that’s the way they play, their style of play is to headbutt the line. But maybe what has happened is an opportunity for them to reassess that. New Zealand are the frontrunners in terms of the way they behave on the field and we should all try and take a leaf out of their book,” Du Plessis said.
ALSO READ:
More drama as Lehmann quits as Aussie coach

For more sport your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.