South Africa are preparing for the third Test against Australia as if Kagiso Rabada will be available, with the fast bowler himself saying on Thursday that his mindset before his appeal against his sanction for making deliberate physical contact with Steven Smith is that he will be playing at Newlands next week.
The Proteas view Rabada brushing shirts with Smith in the second Test in Port Elizabeth as being purely accidental and certainly not worth the three demerit points that the International Cricket Council (ICC) hit him with, taking him over the threshold for an automatic two-Test ban.
A tweet from Vernon Philander’s account – which the paceman on Thursday morning described as being “hacked” – rather sillily accused Smith of simulating the whole incident, expressing surprise that he did not dive to the ground as well.
But the Proteas will surely base their appeal on both players making contact with each other, which raises questions over why just one party was charged and not the Australian captain.
In Rabada’s previous physical contact offence, both he and Sri Lankan Niroshan Dickwella were given three demerit points.
The ICC will name the judicial commissioner to hear the appeal on Friday, which means the hearing is likely to start on Monday.
Rabada’s lawyers will initially argue that he should not be prevented from playing while the appeal is still being decided, in the hope that they can get him available for the crucial third Test starting on Thursday.
South African Cricketers Association chief executive Tony Irish told The Citizen that they believe “there are very good grounds for an appeal”, while Rabada, speaking at a primary school in Centurion on Thursday, reportedly said he was still preparing himself as if he will be playing next week for the Proteas.
The South African squad is set to be announced before the weekend and it looks likely that Duanne Olivier will be called into the squad as the extra frontline bowler with all-rounder Chris Morris also in line for a recall to ensure that the Proteas have enough options in terms of balancing the side in the possible absence of Rabada.
ALSO READ:
More KG drama as Philander claims Twitter account was hacked

For more sport your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.