The agriculture, forestry, and fisheries department (Daff) is squarely to blame for the abalone poaching crisis, the Democratic Alliance said on Sunday.
The DA noted the investigation by the Hawks into an alleged R1 million bribe paid to former president Jacob Zuma by an abalone dealer, DA spokesman Pieter van Dalen said.
“It is not only the latest evidence of a corrupt enterprise that Zuma presided over, but exposes the murky world of abalone poaching which has reached crisis levels, especially in the Western Cape.
“The blame lies squarely at the feet of the department of agriculture, forestry, and fisheries (Daff), which currently presides over an opaque process of disposing [of] confiscated abalone. The sale of confiscated abalone remains hidden from public scrutiny, creating opportunities for illegal trade in the sector,” he said.
The DA would ask Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries Minister Senzeni Zokwana to commit to a firm plan on how his department would open the sale of confiscated abalone to public and parliamentary scrutiny.
“It is clear that proceeds of the sale of confiscated abalone is subsidising the day-to-day running of the department, hence its reluctance to do anything. In doing so, the department is going against established best practice which dictates that the proceeds of crime should be ring-fenced to fight that crime,” he said.
A first step in stopping the illegal trade in abalone would be to bring back the so-called “green courts”. This would ensure that criminal cases were dealt with swiftly and offenders were stopped from further fueling criminality in the sector.
The DA believed that to stop criminality in the abalone sector, it was vital that an open and transparent system be instituted as a matter of urgency, starting with the sale of confiscated abalone, Van Dalen said.
Earlier on Sunday, the City Press newspaper reported that Zuma was being investigated by the Hawks for allegedly accepting a R1 million cash bribe from a Western Cape abalone dealer in exchange for keeping Zokwana in his cabinet.
“In an affidavit deposed at the Lyttelton police station in Centurion in December, businessman Chaile Seretse further alleges that Zokwana, union federation Cosatu president Sdumo Dlamini, and agriculture department deputy director general Siphokazi Ndudane each received a R300,000 bribe from the same businessman – Deon Larry – who is also a convicted child molester,” City Press reported.
Hawks spokesperson Hangwani Mulaudzi this week confirmed that the Hawks were investigating the bribery claims against Zuma, Zokwana, Dlamini and Ndudane, the newspaper reported.