The introduction to South Africa of the Renault Kwid in November 2016 was greeted by the local media with mixed feelings, including yours truly, but it has gone on to become a significant player in the AB segment of the local market.
.
Launched in Expression and Dynamique specification levels the Kwid has offered an affordable alternative for many, in fact a recent survey has shown 60% of Kwid sales were first time buyers.
The Kwid was the third in December 2017’s South African 10 best selling passenger cars with 1 120 units sold.
Last week in the Western Cape, Renault released an additional derivative to the current range topping Dynamique, the new Kwid Dynamique AMT.
The latest derivation offers the same high specification as the manual transmission version of the Dynamique but with the addition of an Automated Manual Transmission.
The SUV inspired style appearance with the 180mm of ground clearance, large recessed door protector panels, a very rugged grille assembly and wheel arch extensions, give the car a purposeful appearance.
.
The interior provides a spacious and comfortable environment, the seats are cloth covered and both front seats are adjustable for height and the driver’s seat is four way adjustable.
The instrument panel is fully digital, unusual in a vehicle in this segment, a centrally mounted 180mm touch screen displays the MediaNav navigation and multi-media system.
This system offers Bluetooth audio streaming and hands free telephony, USB and AUX inputs as well as a speed sensitive volume control. Standard equipment includes a driver’s airbag, front electric windows, air conditioning and remote central locking plus lots of storage and bottle holders.
Boot space is a best in class at 300 litres. Mounted on the lower central dash is the rotary control for the 5 speed AMT. The control has three modes – reverse, neutral and drive. It is necessary to switch on the ignition and then wait for three seconds before starting the 1 litre 3 cylinder, Smart Control efficiency (SCe) engine.
The power unit produces peak power of 50 kW at 5500 r/min and torque of 91 Nm at 4250 r/min. The claimed fuel figures for the new AMT version is 4.4 litres/100km. Driving the new Kwid AMT is an interesting experience, somewhat similar to the transmissions employed on the Alfa Romeo 156 in 1999.
.
Known as a robotised manual transmission, it introduced an element of automatic transmission but it certainly was not a seamless shift system.
Do not expect to enjoy the drive that a CVT transmission or even a conventional torque converter auto box delivers, but AMT is a very different sensation.
I have to admit that I have always had difficulty driving an automated manual transmission equipped vehicle, but my experience has been limited to launch drives which are of relatively short duration.
It is possible that with more time behind the wheel I would discover the technique for seamless gear shifts rather than the jerky ones my efforts produced. Generally , ride quality was very good as were the chassis dynamics for an entry level offering.
So there you have it. A high specification, low cost vehicle now available with an automated transmission at a very competitive price, but there is a concern from many that the safety aspect of the vehicle leaves much to be desired.
In its original configuration, the Renault Kwid failed to achieve a single star rating following Euro NCAP testing.
The upgraded version has now achieved a one star rating, which indicates “marginal crash protection”.
The lack of a passenger airbag and ABS are the main concerns of many, but the Kwid is not the only low cost entry level vehicle sold in SA, as was discussed at the recent AASA and FIA #SaferCarsforAfrica initiative in Cape Town.
.
The addition of ABS and a passenger airbag is scheduled for next year, ABS in the first quarter and the airbag in the second half of 2019.
This will not be standard equipment but as an additional cost option.
Renault has decided to retain the present Kwid specification and leave the decision to upgrade the safety equipment entirely in the hands of the potential purchaser, thereby keeping the pricing structure within the reach of the lower income group. Well, 10 544 new owners seem to think that’s fine.
That’s sales of 659 units a month.
.
The Kwid is certainly filling a niche in the market, allowing those with far less disposable income to purchase a brand new car with all the benefits that offers, including a five year 150 000km warranty and 24 hour road side assistance.
Limited-edition Renault Kwid launches in SA