The Jaguar F-Pace gets the SVR treatment to make it the fastest and most powerful F-Pace yet, with an enhanced chassis and aerodynamics for maximum driver reward in all conditions.
,
Engineered by Special Vehicle Operations (SVO), and gifted a 44% increase in power, the F-Pace SVR’s 5.0-litre V8 supercharged petrol engine produces 405kW and 680Nm, enabling it to reach 0-100km/h in 4.3 seconds with a top speed of 283km/h.
According to Mike Cross, Chief Engineer, Vehicle Integrity, Jaguar Land Rover “The F-Pace SVR delivers the handling and agility to match its performance.
Everything from the steering to the bespoke suspension set-up has been tuned specifically for our performance SUV and the result is a vehicle that lives up to the promise of both the F-Pace and SVR names.”
Aerodynamic enhancements include larger air intakes at the front and side fender vents that lower pressure in the wheel arches, reduce lift and provide additional cooling while also optimising high-speed stability.
.
In addition, unique wheel arch extensions and lower body mouldings provide a low-slung muscularity that sets the SVR apart.
An exclusive SVR bonnet features vents to help extract hot air from the engine bay and provide visual evidence of the SVR’s dynamic intent. At the rear, a unique spoiler is joined by a new bumper housing the quad tailpipes of the Active Exhaust system.
The bumper incorporates side strakes that aid aerodynamic performance by smoothing airflow away from the rear of the vehicle.
The uprated chassis has progressive front and rear springs that are 30 and 10% stiffer respectively and incorporate an anti-roll bar specification that contributes to a 5% reduction in body roll.
.
New, lightweight forged 21- and optional 22-inch alloy wheels are wider at the rear by 25mm compared to the front and contribute to the SVR’s enhanced handling. The 22-inch wheels are 2.4kg lighter on the front and 1.7kg lighter on the rear, designed to deliver greater airflow to the uprated larger 395mm front and 396mm rear brake discs.
The brake discs feature an advanced two-piece construction on the front and rear to reduce weight, further contributing to the SVR’s agile handling.
F-Pace SVR also features Jaguar’s Variable Valve Active Exhaust System.
This provides a charismatic soundtrack and is another factor behind the SVR’s increased performance capability as the active system allows increased gas flow.
The SVR exhaust is 6.6kg lighter than the standard F-Pace system. The first F-Pace to utilise Jaguar’s rear Electronic Active Differential (EAD), F-Pace SVR features a comprehensive range of advanced technologies.
.
The torque on-demand AllWheel Drive system’s Intelligent Driveline Dynamics (IDD) control technology has been optimised to maximise the benefit of the EAD, and the software for the Adaptive Dynamics suspension, Electronic Power Assisted Steering (EPAS) and Dynamic Driving Mode are all bespoke to SVR.
Engaging Dynamic mode initiates faster, more responsive gearshifts, sharper throttle responses and increased steering response for a more engaging driving experience in all conditions.
Inside, the F-Pace SVR features slimline performance front seats that provide enhanced lateral support and have signature lozenge quilting and embossed SVR logo.
.
In addition, unique rear seats echo the heavily sculpted designs up front and the SUV’s sports car character is underlined by the Sport Shift Selector. Finally, the SVR branded steering wheel features tactile aluminium paddle shifters.
For all its performance, the SVR retains the practicality and versatility inherent to the Pace family, with its 650-litre loadspace (with rear seats up) unaffected by its enhanced performance.
Jaguar’s SUV keeps passengers connected and entertained on the move with 4G WiFi for up to eight devices and is also equipped with the advanced Touch Pro infotainment system with 10-inch touchscreen.
.
Four interior colour themes help highlight the vehicle’s personality: Red with Jet, Light Oyster with Jet, Siena Tan with Jet and Jet with Light Oyster stitching.
The Pace SVR will be in South Africa by mid-2018 at pricing still to be determined.
DRIVEN: Jaguar’s E-Pace compact SUV