After a resounding World Premiere in Cape Town and a comprehensive press test drive in Chile, South African pricing and specifications of the Mercedes-Benz X-Class have been announced.
The South African market launch of the newest member of the all-encompassing Mercedes-Benz Vans family, the X-Class, is scheduled for May 2018.
The X-Class unites the typical characteristics of a bakkie with the classical strengths of a Mercedes: convincing robustness with modern design, impressive off-road capabilities with high driving dynamics and safety, sophisticated functionality and stylish comfort. This first of its kind bakkie is available at competitive prices:



Model description
*Purchase price (including VAT and CO2 tax)


X-Class X220d 4X2 PROGRESSIVE
Manual Transmission only
R 642 103.00


X-Class X250d 4X2 PROGRESSIVE
Automatic Transmission only
R 694 025. 00


X-Class X250d 4X4 PROGRESSIVE
Manual Transmission (available in  automatic as an optional extra)
R 696 785.00


X-Class X250d 4X4 POWER
(Manual Transmission (available in  automatic as an optional extra)
R 791 315.00



Two design and equipment lines for different lifestyles and working environments are available in South Africa:

The X-Class PROGRESSIVE is aimed at people seeking a rugged bakkie with extra styling and comfort functions, while also being a comfortable yet prestigious vehicle for private or dual use
The X-Class POWER is the high-end line. It is aimed at customers for whom styling, performance and comfort are paramount. As a lifestyle vehicle beyond the mainstream, it is suitable for urban environments as well as for sports and leisure activities off the beaten track. Its design and high level of equipment reflect an independent and individualistic lifestyle

“The much-anticipated Mercedes-Benz X-Class is well-positioned to elevate the South African bakkie segment to the next level. It will do this not only by offering a dynamic design paired with luxurious interior and unparalleled performance, but also by being perfectly-priced,” said Nadia Trimmel, Head of Mercedes-Benz Vans Southern Africa.
“We are confident that no other bakkie can offer customers the level of comfort, technological leadership, functionality, premium quality, performance and reliability that the X-Class possesses,” she added.
The Mercedes-Benz X-Class comes standard with the manufacturer’s PremiumDrive, designed to give customers complete peace of mind. It is one of the leading full maintenance plans in South Africa and ensures superior cover for 100 000 km/6 years, whichever occurs first. For a nominal cost, customers have the option of extending the maintenance plan up to a maximum of 180 000km/8 years, whichever occurs first.
The prices detailed are the manufacturer’s recommended retail prices, and exclude optional extras and any dealer associated costs, such as registration, delivery, etc. The X-Class is available with a full range of accessories, which are excluded from the recommended retail prices above. For the final price, please contact your nearest Mercedes-Benz dealer.
The Mercedes-Benz X-Class is now available to be ordered, for delivery from mid-May 2018, subject to stock availability. To configure your Mercedes-Benz X-Class and for more information on the vehicle and authorised selling outlets, log on to www.x-class.co.za.
*Prices effective from 1 April 2018 and include the impending VAT rate of 15% as well as new CO2 tax values.
DRIVEN: New Mercedes-Benz X-Class bakkie set to make its mark