The commission of inquiry into state capture chaired by Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo resumes today, with the Democratic Alliance (DA) picketing outside the venue calling on senior African National Congress (ANC) leaders implicated in state capture to testify before the commission.
Speaking at the DA picket, leader Mmusi Maimane told the SABC that the party is of the view that state capture is an ANC project.
“If we want to eradicate state capture in South Africa we must deal with the architect of state capture which is the ANC,” Maimane said.
The DA leader said attention needs to be drawn to that all those who have testified at the commission are members of the ANC.
Maimane said the DA is calling for the ANC’s secretary-general Ace Magashule, the president Cyril Ramaphosa, and respective ministers implicated by witness testimony at the inquiry to appear before the commission.
The DA has written to Zondo stating that it wants to present evidence before the commission, Maimane added.
“We were the original complainants. Remember when Mcebisi Jonas raised this concern we started with the public protector, we proceeded with the litigation on the matter. Now we can’t come to a commission that will absolve the ANC of its duties,” Maimane said.
The DA leader added that the commission has thus far done an admirable job, though a whole lot more work still needs to be completed.
In a statement on Thursday, Maimane said the DA had requested that ANC national chairperson Gwede Mantashe, deputy secretary-general Jessie Duarte, former president Jacob Zuma, Ramaphosa, former minister of mineral resources Mosebenzi Zwane, Minister of Home Affairs Malusi Gigaba, former Finance Minister and former minister of Cooperate Governance and Traditional Affairs Des van Rooyen, Lynne Brown, suspended Sars commissioner Tom Moyane, Arthur Fraser, David Mahlobo, and David Mabuza be called to testify before the commission.
“Nothing in the commission’s terms of reference bar it from calling the above-mentioned individuals to appear and to account,” the statement reads.
The DA said Ramaphosa should appear before the commission because as former deputy president of the party and the country, he cannot deny having known about ANC involvement in state capture.
“He must appear before the commission to explain whether he knew about state capture, and what he did about it once he found out.
“The ANC, as arch architects of corruption and state capture, must appear before this commission and tell South Africans the truth.”
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.