A video that has been circulating on social media showing what appears to be the aftermath of an assault has been met with shock and outrage and is assumed to be racially motivated.
While on Tuesday the context of the altercation was not known, a Facebook post names the victim as Godfrey Masuku and alleges that the attack occurred simply because he was drunk.
It occurred in Machadodorp, Mpumalanga.
Picture: Facebook screenshot.
A story in the Daily Sun this morning (Wednesday) confirms the man’s identity, claiming that he was assaulted by members of the Community Policing Forum (CPF) who were later arrested.
The incident also apparently led to a shop owned by a man who employed the person who initially had an altercation with Masuku. The shop owner supposedly called the CPF alerting them to his store being looted and set on fire by angry residents who say the incident was racially motivated.
It’s been claimed that 41-year-old Masuku got into a fight with a white man, who pepper sprayed him and attacked him, before calling CPF members who also assaulted him.

(function(d, s, id) {  var js, fjs = d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0];  if (d.getElementById(id)) return;  js = d.createElement(s); js.id = id;  js.src = 'https://connect.facebook.net/en_GB/sdk.js#xfbml=1&version=v3.1';  fjs.parentNode.insertBefore(js, fjs);}(document, 'script', 'facebook-jssdk'));

What Masuku had done wrong is unclear.
Racial tension in Mpumalanga appears to be rife.
In July, it was reported that the residents in the town of Middelburg were on edge following the alleged brutal assault and killing of Xolisile Ndzongana by a group of white men.
A group of petrol attendants working in Middelburg told The Sowetan at the time that the attack did not come as a surprise considering the racism they were subjected to daily in the town.
“They call us all sorts of names,” a petrol attendant said.
READ MORE: Brutal attack, allegedly racially motivated, takes place in Pretoria nightclub
Another attendant added: “This is Middelburg, racism lives here. Even when we report [incidents] to our managers, they tell us that the customer is always right, so what must we do?”
A third attendant said that racist incidents increased on weekends due to drunkenness.
“They call us monkeys and then act as though they are playing with you. What hurts the most is the vulgar language, and I do not understand it. A week will not go by where you do not go home feeling useless because of the way someone spoke to you.”
Middelburg was also where the infamous coffin assault took place in 2016. Farmers Theo Jackson and Willem Oosthuizen were sentenced to 10 years in prison for kidnapping and assault after forcing Victor Mlotshwa into a coffin.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.