Opposition parties the Democratic Alliance (DA) and the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) have called on the former minister of social development, Bathabile Dlamini, to be axed following the Constitutional Court ruling today that Dlamini should be held liable for costs in relation to the grants crises.
In a unanimous judgement, the Constitutional Court found Dlamini should be held personally responsible for the social grants fiasco at the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa).
Dlamini was ordered to pay 20% of Black Sash and Freedom Under Law’s legal costs, which run into millions.
The former social development minister was moved to the minister of women in the presidency during President Cyril Ramaphosa’s first cabinet reshuffle earlier this year.
In a statement today, shadow minister on social development Bridget Masango said the ruling shows that Dlamini cannot be trusted with championing the rights of the most vulnerable in society.
“President Ramaphosa can no longer ignore this fact and would fire her immediately if he has any care for the millions of people she has already and will continue to endanger,” Masango said.
The DA MP said the Constitutional Court described Dlamini’s behaviour as “reckless and grossly negligent” and said that a copy of the judgment should be sent to the National Director of Public Prosecutions to determine if Dlamini can be prosecuted for perjury if indeed she lied to the court.
“Given this damning judgment, President Cyril Ramaphosa must fire Dlamini immediately from her position as minister of women in the Presidency. This appointment should not have happened in the first place given that she manufactured the social grants crisis, so she could benefit through the planned extension of the illegal CPS contract,” Masango said.
Masango accused the governing party, the African National Congress, of protecting and rewarding Dlamini for her role in the grants crisis, instead of holding her accountable.
The IFP’s spokesperson on women and social development Liezl van der Merwe called the ruling a “victory” for the country’s democracy, accountability and for grant recipients affected by the Sassa grant crisis.
The party also called for Dlamini’s head, saying “it is now time for President Ramaphosa to act against this rogue minister”.
The IFP called on Ramaphosa to act decisively against Dlamini and relieve her of duties as a minister in her current portfolio.
“If President Ramaphosa is truly passionate about the plight of the most vulnerable in society and truly committed to building a South Africa where unethical leaders are punished, Minister Dlamini should have no place in his cabinet.”


For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.