A man drowned and another man and two young boys suffered non-fatal drowning symptoms when the canoe they were in capsized in the Keurbooms River mouth area at Plettenberg Bay in the Western Cape, the National Sea Rescue Institute (NSRI) said on Sunday.
NSRI Plettenberg Bay duty crew were activated at 3.25pm on Saturday afternoon following reports from the South African Police Service (SAPS) of a boat capsized in the vicinity of the Keurbooms River mouth, NSRI Plettenberg Bay station commander Marc Rodgers said.
The sea rescue craft Ray Farnham, Airlink Rescuer, and Free Runner were launched and the NSRI rescue vehicle, the SAPS, Western Cape government health emergency medical services (EMS), Medlife ambulance services, and Plettenberg Bay Community Protection Association members also responded.
“On arrival on the scene at Poortjies Beach, Keurbooms River mouth, we found a canoe with four people on board, two adult males aged 30 and two male children aged eight, all from Plettenberg Bay, had capsized, and we believe local fishermen were able to rescue all four from the water,” he said.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was commenced on one of the men and breathing assistance resuscitation was started on one of the children who was in a critical condition.
The second man and the second child were treated for shock and non-fatal drowning symptoms. All four were transported to hospital, but sadly after all CPR efforts were exhausted on the man he was declared dead.
The child remained in a critical condition in hospital in Plettenberg Bay overnight and after his condition stabilised he was transferred to a hospital in George. He remained in a serious but stable condition, but doctors were confident that the child would recover, Rodgers said.
The second man and the second child were both released from hospital following treatment and police had opened an inquest docket. Condolences were conveyed to family and friends of the dead man, he said.
– African News Agency (ANA)
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.