A Chatsworth Secondary School pupil, who was preparing for his matric exams, died a hero while protecting his brother during an altercation on Saturday with his brother’s girlfriend’s relative, who allegedly did not approve of their relationship, reports Rising Sun Chatsworth.
Roryen Michael Naidoo, 20, was shot dead in Westcliff after trying to resolve a dispute between his 18-year-old brother and his girlfriend’s relative.
ALSO READ: Missing matric learner found dead in bush
Communications officer of Chatsworth SAPS Cpt Cheryl Pillay said police arrested a 40-year-old suspect for the murder and he was under police guard at a local hospital.
“The arrest was made after a 20-year-old man was shot during an altercation in Westcliff on Saturday, September 22. The victim was transported to hospital, where he succumbed to his injuries,” she said.
Police received information that the suspect was at a local hospital receiving treatment after being stabbed, according to Cpt Pillay.
“Police seized a CZ75 pistol, one magazine, ammunition and a knife. The accused will appear in the Chatsworth Magistrate’s Court soon,” added Pillay.
Naidoo’s father, Rodney, said, “My 18-year-old son had reported to Roryen about the incident and Roryen accompanied him to the suspect’s house to resolve the issue. He tried speaking to the accused and an altercation ensued. During the altercation, someone passed a firearm to the suspect and, while my son tried to disarm him, he was shot in the abdomen,” said the distraught father.

Rodney believes his son died a hero while trying to protect his younger brother. He said Roryen had always been protective over his siblings and took great pride in taking care of them, making sure they did not stray.
He aspired to pursue a career in law enforcement and join the SAPS after he completed matric. He also planned to study labour law while he worked as a police officer.
He was described as a jovial person who loved and cared for everyone he knew. He will be laid to rest on Tuesday.

For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.