Top leaders within the Democratic Alliance (DA) have been approached and asked to hand in their cellphones and laptops in a bid to find out who leaked a story about the party’s attempts to get Mmusi Maimane to run as Western Cape premier to the media, The Sunday Times reports.
None other than the party’s federal legal commission chair, Glynnis Breytenbach, is said to be heading up the investigation.
Western Cape DA leader Bonginkosi Madikizela confirmed that he was contacted and asked to hand over his devices but says he refused.
“I take exception to being investigated for leaks,” he told The Sunday Times.
READ MORE: Maimane likely to be announced as WC premier today
Meanwhile, Breytenbach confirmed her role in the investigation while telling the publication no more.
“What kind of a banana would I be if I discussed an ongoing investigation with you?” she said.
It was reported on September 18 that the DA’s federal executive committee was set to rule on who Helen Zille’s possible successor would be after a surprising last-minute move by the DA when they added Maimane’s name to the candidate list.
This was followed by the DA postponing the announcement of its Western Cape premier candidate for the 2019 elections.
READ MORE: Mmusi says no to being Western Cape premier
Experts described the move of deploying Maimane as premier as indicative of the party’s fear of losing the Western Cape. The Citizen reported earlier that the DA wants to use Maimane’s leadership clout to stop a possible takeover of the Western Cape by the ANC in 2019.
But while many expected Maimane to accept the invitation to run as premier, he turned it down.
According to political analyst Susan Booysen, the DA was calculating its fortunes after polls indicated the ANC might be able to hold on to Gauteng in 2019 due to weak opposition in the province.
“The DA in the Western Cape still has the best chance of still being in government. That the polls show the ANC was doing well in the Western Cape currently is a source of worry for the DA, so they feel they might need their national leader to lead their campaign there,” Booysen said.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.