WARNING: The memes in this article may be offensive to many. 
Two of South Africa’s far-right bloggers, who appear to be firm supporters of Afrikaner lobby group AfriForum, one of which has collaborated with their deputy CEO, Ernst Roets, on YouTube videos, appear to have had their racism exposed after their messages to each other on gaming chat service Discord were leaked.
They are Danie Barnard and Willem Petzer. Both are well known for videos seeking to highlight the plight of white farmers in South Africa and white people in general.
Now a chat group hosted by Petzer, in which Barnard is an active member, has been exposed by Unicorn Riot, a US non-profit media organisation whose Discord Leaks have exposed hundreds of thousands of discord chats from alt-right and far-right servers, most of which were in the US, but one of which was Petzer’s in South Africa.
Willem Petzer and his wife Rene outside whites-only town Orania.
Willem Petzer with Adolf Hitler’s racist autobiography Mein Kampf.
Petzer himself boasted publicly boasted that his Discord server was “the best racist, sexist, homophobic, transphobic and Islamophobic chat in South Africa”.

Memes posted by members of the chat are a mix of blatant racism, apartheid nostalgia and even overt Nazi symbolism.


P




Not all of the memes are racist. Some are sexist instead.

Willem Petzer
Petzer’s own chats in the group include his belief that anyone bothered by the k-word is an “extremely pathetic excuse for a human being”, his view that Mandela was a “horrible communist terrorist” and his advising those on the group to start fake profiles pretending to be black, with Petzer listing some ideas for authentic-sounding black names.



Danie Barnard
Danie Barnard is a vlogger who has created the hashtag #BoerTestimony in an attempt to draw attention to farm murders.
In a YouTube video, Barnard says: “We do not try to spread any false information, nor are we right wing extremists or Nazis…”
Far-right vlogger Danie Barnard. Picture: Facebook.
However, his posts on Petzer’s Discord chat group indicate that, while Barnard publicly denies being to the far right of the political spectrum, privately he is happy to display a level of racism and a nostalgia for apartheid on a par with Petzer’s.





Barnard’s posts were under the name Daniebees, who we have confirmed is indeed Barnard. The first screenshot shows a post by Daniebees, and the second shows the same picture, published under Barnard’s public Facebook account.


Jeremy Nell, better known by his nickname Jerm, also has a Discord chat group called Nothing Left that has been fully screenshotted in the Discord Leaks. In it, he can be seen lobbying for patrons to fund his work as South African mainstream media will largely no longer do so. He also posted a recent cartoon in which he appears to be advocating for the widely discredited idea that certain races are inherently more intelligent than others, an idea that has its roots in eugenics theories championed by the Nazi party under Hitler in Germany.
A cartoon by Jeremy ‘Jerm’ Nell.
A source also told us that Petzer allegedly has a closed Facebook group called ‘Pofadder Pit’ with members including Ernst Roets, Steve Hofmeyr, Freedom Front Plus leader Pieter Groenewald and Cape secessionist Carlo Viljoen.
We are looking into this information and will publish a follow-up soon.
We have approached AfriForum’s Roets for comment in an attempt to establish the extent of his links to Petzer and Barnard and what he thinks of the leaked memes.
We have sent him questions and will publish his response once received.
Willem Petzer (right) and AfriForum’s deputy CEO Ernst Roets at the launch of his book Kill the Boer.
Ernst Roets tweets about a video in which he speaks to right-wing vlogger Willem Petzer.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.