SABC’s Limpopo-based radio station Phalaphala FM has allegedly banned their staff from speaking about a range of topics including VBS Mutual Bank, Vhavenda King Toni Mphephu Ramabulana, and the Vhembe district municipality.
The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Limpopo released a statement on Tuesday saying they will be writing to the SABC board to intervene.
The party says the “gagging” of Phalaphala FM staff is not surprising as Vhembe municipality mayor Florence Radzilani, who is also the ANCs provincial deputy chairperson in Limpopo, is believed to have deposited R300 million into VBS Bank.
The DA’s statement read: “The Vhembe district municipality deposit is one of 8 made by municipalities in Limpopo, which collectively amounted to R1.2 billion. These deposits were in contravention of the Municipal Finance Management Act No. 56 of 2003 (MFMA) as they were made despite an instruction not to do so by National Treasury.”
The Citizen reported in August that a VBS-linked cartel consisting of ANC bigwigs from Limpopo has allegedly been pressurising municipal managers, chief financial officers (CFOs), and politicians who refused to play ball when ordered to invest municipal money in the controversial mutual bank.
READ MORE: Alleged ANC ‘cartel’ with VBS Bank links targeting Limpopo officials
Sources told The Citizen the cartel comprises of ANC “top dogs” from the Limpopo provincial executive committee (PEC) and officials from regions who speak the same political language as them.
The Limpopo ANC said it had launched investigations into allegations that certain members were involved in the VBS saga.
Provincial secretary Soviet Lekganyane said: “We get worried every time the name of the organisation is mentioned in the same breath as the VBS scandal.
“The ANC is not a soothsayer. We’re only appealing to those reportedly mistreated to come forward with tangible proof and we will not hesitate to take action.”
Last month, the EFF in Limpopo publicly accused ANC provincial treasurer Danny Msiza of holding municipal bosses, council speakers, and ANC chief whips hostage. The party claimed Msiza was responsible for wooing local municipalities to invest with the liquidated bank.
Msiza has since distanced himself from the allegations, branding them lies fabricated by individuals waging a political vendetta against him.
Additional reporting by Alex Matlala 
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.