The ANC Youth League (ANCYL) has declared that ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule is interfering with the league’s upcoming elective conference, Sunday World reports.
ANCYL secretary-general Njabulo Nzuza allegedly confirmed this after approaching Magashule.
Nzuza added that other ministers bothering the league are ANC spokesperson Pule Mabe and national executive committee (NEC) member and former ANCYL deputy president Ronald Lamola, reads the article.
ALSO READ: Thanduxolo Sabelo denies meeting Zuma, backers on ousting ANC leadership, seeks legal advice
Two ANC members who revealed this to Sunday World further alleged that Magashule, Mabe and Lamola are meddling in affairs to ensure that the favoured candidate Thanduxolo Sabelo beats ANCYL treasurer-general Reggie Nkabinde.
Sabelo is alleged to be involved in an alleged meeting with former president Jacob Zuma and his supporters to plot the ousting of the current ANC leadership. He feverishly denied the allegations made by Sunday Times earlier this month.
“I want to state that I was never part of a meeting as detailed in the article. I am not part of a plot and will not be part of a plot to oust the sitting leadership of the African National Congress. I enjoy a good working relationship with the President Cyril Ramaphosa, the president of the ANC and the republic, and would not be part of a plot to oust him,” Sabelo said.
The anonymous sources said that in light of the allegations against Sabelo, Magashule, Mabe and Lamola realised that this plan fell flat, and are exhausting their authority to try and ensure that Sabelo wins the October elections. Nkabinde, the source told the Sunday newspaper, is seen as being supportive of the current ANC leadership.
Further, the source told Sunday World that outgoing ANCYL president Collen Maine is also in line with the alleged agenda to have Sabelo emerge victorious, and alleged that Maine asked for the league to be disbanded at a meeting held in Pretoria on Friday. Maine has since denied these allegations. Mabe confirmed that the meeting took place, but cited that this was purely to resolve issues before the conference in October.
An ANC member dismissed all claims of meddling by Mabe, Magashule and Lamola, saying that not many members support Nkabinde because the league will not thrive under his leadership. The member also alleged that Nkabinde is lazy, and that Nzuza’s loyalty towards Nkabinde is no secret.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.