Amelia Taaibos works as a caregiver and her job is to save and change lives. But, hers is one of the lives which has been saved and changed. 
Khaya Centre, south of Lenasia in Joburg, became her home four years ago, at a time when she was at the lowest point in her life and in desperate need of help. 
“I discovered this place when my twin sister passed away of HIV/Aids. At the time I was suicidal and an alcoholic. My eldest sister also used to volunteer here at the time and so the project manager, Valencia Kock, came to the funeral and helped us in every way possible – mentally, physically and emotionally. 
“After that I moved to Lehae from Eldoraldo Park with my daughter – who was a year old at the time – and offered to volunteer here to get my mind off my sister’s death and other things,” said Taaibos. 
After she started working at the centre as a volunteer, she said her life changed for the better. Apart from having something to do every day, she learnt a lot about how to cope in a new community and how to deal and help people suffering or affected by HIV/Aids. 
“It’s very painful, but if I knew back then what I know now, I think I could have saved my sister’s life. I would have taken her to the clinic to get help. I would have made sure she knew more about the disease and that she got enough medication. 
“All we knew back then was that she was suffering from TB but it was only when she died that we found out it was HIV. Her boyfriend died as well.”
After working as a volunteer for a while, Taaibos was promoted to a caregiver. 
“My child is going to graduate soon [from Khaya Centre’s early child development classes] and I am no longer suicidal or an alcoholic. 
“This is home. I live just down the road but I am here 24/7. If it wasn’t for Valencia, this place and the community, I think I would have been dead a long time ago and my child would not have a mother. This place has changed my life and I am really grateful,” said Taaibos. 
The community centre is a project run by Mount Olive outreach, paying particular attention to the affairs of women and children, especially those living with or affected by HIV/Aids. 
The project has a number of sponsors, including the Dutch Orange Babies charity, which backs a number of projects around Southern Africa. The organisation supports children who are infected with HIV or are otherwise directly affected. 
Mount Olive’s project manager Kock said their mother and child clinic at Khaya Centre sees about 400 clients per month free of charge. 
They have a number of support groups to help their clients – from pregnant women with HIV to young girls who discovered they were HIV positive from birth. 
She said the project has a huge impact on the community because there are no other medical clinics available for the residents there who are unemployed and unable to afford transport to the nearest clinic or any specialised services. 
One of their donors from The Footprints Foundation, Bob Holt, said he was involved in projects like this to help people in need. 
“It’s for the people … to help those who are in need. I support a lot of places like this and it’s always the people that we do it for. 
“I feel more fulfilled doing this than when I am doing all my other businesses. If you save a life, it’s worth everything.” 
– jeniffero@citizen.co.za
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.