The link between depression and suicide
There is a major link between depression and suicide, and whereas sadness, loneliness, grief, and disappointment are normal reactions to life’s struggles, undiagnosed depression can lead to tragedy.

Up to one third of all suicide victims have attempted suicide previously. Research indicates that although more females attempt suicide, more males succeed. This is due to the more violent methods males choose. Girls are more likely to overdose on medication, or take chemicals, whereas boys often find access to firearms or hang themselves.
ALSO READ: ‘Depression is not a weakness’ – moving open letter about Prof Mayosi’s death
Key signs of depression


Loss of interest in things they like to do
Sadness that won’t go away
Irritability or feeling angry a lot

Other signs include:

Feeling guilty or hopeless
Feeling tense or worrying a lot
Crying a lot
Spending a lot of time alone
Eating too much or too little
Sleeping too much or too little
Having low energy or restless feelings
Feeling tired a lot
Missing school a lot
Hard time making decisions
Having trouble thinking or paying attention
Thinking of dying or killing themselves

According to the South African Depression and Anxiety Group (Sadag) many teens don’t speak out or get help due to the stigma attached or because they are afraid of being judged.
Children should be educated about teen depression and suicide and be empowered to talk to their loved ones and reach out for help.
Get help
Sadag: “It is important to know that if you are feeling depressed or suicidal, you are not alone. There are people who care about you, even if it is a classmate, friend, favourite teacher, principal, family member, or even a counsellor at Sadag – we are here to help. Remember that suicide is a permanent solution to a temporary problem. You can get help.”
If you are concerned about an adolescent (or adult) at risk of suicide contact the Suicide Crisis Helpline at 0800 567 567 or SMS 31393. The 24-hour helpline can be reached at 0800 12 13 14.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android