We’re young, we’re hungry and we’re going to give the rest a run for their money.
That was the challenge issued by South Africa’s team captain Lyle Hewitson’s to Team Australia, Team UK and Team Asia last night before the PGI International Jockeys Challenge which will be run at the Kranji Racecourse in Singapore today.
Hewitson was speaking after Team SA – consisting of Muzi Yeni, Aldo Domeyer and himself – received their silks for today’s challenge.
In typically down-played Aussie style, Hugh Bowman from Team Australia was keen to accept Hewitson’s challenge, saying the South African youngsters should be just fine, “as long as they stay three lengths behind”.
Although said in jest, it was obvious the 12 competing jockeys are taking the challenge very seriously.
The four teams were presented with their silks during a dinner hosted by the Orchard Hotel Singapore.
Welcoming the teams to Singapore, Chong Boo Ching, President and Chief Executive of the Singapore Turf Club, flew the flag for locals, saying his money will be safe on Team Asia.
When Yeni was interviewed on his arrival in Singapore he said: “Don’t ask me about my rides. I haven’t got a clue!” he told a Singapore Turf Club journalist.
Money King, Dreamweaver, Moritz Eclipse and Mr Dujardin are the horses the lightweight rider has drawn in the four races designated for the inaugural challenge.
“I watch Singapore races on TV broadcast back home, and I had also already done my homework before riding here. We also have Polytrack in Port Elizabeth, but this one looks more cambered and is a real quick track,” said Yeni who has also ridden in Brazil, Greece and Mauritius.
But one thing the 31-year-old Durbanite is not overawed by are the big names in the other Teams – Team Asia, Team Australia and Team UK. While Yeni respects such luminaries like Joao Moreira, Hugh Bowman and Hayley Turner he has belief in his own ability.
“I’ve taken part in many such series back home, won the Victor Ludorum four times, rode a winner in Korea and also took part in one in Macau,” said Yeni.
“I’ve ridden against Frankie Deori and Christophe Soumillon, and the current teams on Tuesday are also made up of top jockeys.
“What I enjoy about such series is the mix of different jockeys from around the world.
It’s also a privilege to represent your country and be part of a team.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.
Would you like to place a bet
on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.