It seems that a report on Bonang Matheba’s problems with SARS is not as fake as the celebrity’s team had claimed.
A report in the Sunday World on Sunday says that Matheba will have to face charges of fraud at the Johannesburg specialised commercial crimes court on Thursday.
The Hawks allegedly charged Matheba with fraud relating to both her personal and business tax.
It was reported in August that according to Channel 24, Bonang planned to sue Sunday World for R10 million for their initial story on the celebrity’s alleged tax drama.
READ MORE: Bonang Matheba to sue Sunday World for R10m
The first report in Sunday World claimed Bonang was summonsed to appear in the Johannesburg Specialised Commercial Crime Court for tax fraud but the paper said the matter was suspended indefinitely, however, pending an investigation.
Bonang’s publicist Davin Philips said she wasn’t “summonsed to appear,” and did not appear on charges of tax fraud, claiming the Sunday World’s report contained numerous “factual errors”.
Channel 24 reports that Bonang is now taking legal action against the paper. She is seeking damages of R10 million for “damages done to her good name and character.”
But days after Bonang’s alleged intention to sue, Sunday World responded to claims that the initial report was“fake” by denying the accusations.
READ MORE: Sunday World stands firm on Bonang ‘tax fraud report’
The publication released a statement on the Sowetan’s website, with Mapula Nkosi, the editor of Sunday World saying he stands by the story.
“Sunday World rejects assertions that have been circulated that our recent story titled Hawks pounce on Bonang as SARS zooms in on taxes is fake. We stand by the report and the comment by National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) spokesperson Phindi Louw-Mjonondwane who firmly confirmed the matter to us.
“A fraud docket with a case number that Sunday World has seen has been registered at the Johannesburg Central Station against Bonang Dorothy Matheba,” read part of the statement.
The statement went on to add that the paper used a triple sourcing method and that two court officials also confirmed the allegations to it. “While we respect Matheba’s right to seek recourse available to her, any matter of her intended lawsuit will be ventilated in the appropriate forum,” added that statement.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.