I really don’t do hardcore politics and I am sure I am like many other South Africans.
I just want to be able to earn an income, feed and educate my children, put a roof over their heads and know that we are all safe in our beds at night.
.
I don’t care what colour you are, what religion you are, going hungry or being a victim of crime hurts you all the same.
Obviously, I wish we had a government in power that took responsibility for the corruption that is so rife and is killing our economy and could get a handle on the rampant crime that is destroying so many families.
When I got invited to Jordan, a rather politically volatile part of the world, by Hyundai to drive their new Santa Fe, I decided I would simply enjoy the stunning sights that the country has to offer, drive their new SUV and not overthink why people take such perverse pleasure in turning on each other at will.
But enough of the politics. It’s time to get to Hyundai’s new Santa Fe that will be arriving in our country by the end of November.
This is the all-new, fourth generation of the popular large SUV. One thing you won’t miss – the styling has radically changed from the previous generation.
Hyundai is heading in a new direction when it comes to design for their SUV family of vehicles that was started by the Kona. And you are either going to like it or loathe it.
HISTORIC. Mark Jones out sight-seeing in Jordan surrounded by a very interesting form of public transport
I really doubt there will be any fence-sitting on this topic.
The biggest change for me is the front-end treatment that comprises slim LED Daytime Running Lights (DRL) positioned on top of the LED headlights, while retaining the signature Cascading Grille.
So, while most SUVs have the main headlights at the top and the running lights at the bottom corners, Hyundai have done the complete opposite.
Side on, you get a low-slung yet typical boxy view of the Santa Fe, and the rear is equally trend setting in that the upper rear lamp is comprised of LEDs, and indicator, reverse lights and fog lights are integrated in the rear bumper at the bottom.
.
Do I like it? Yes, I do. It’s a break from the traditional square architecture of most SUVs. The bigger test though is whether potential customers that will have to part with their own money will see this the same way.
Predicting the Santa Fe’s price when it lands here before the end of the year is impossible, but the outgoing model was set at around the R700 000 mark, so maybe this will give you some idea of what to expect.
.
We will be getting three specification levels – Premium (with front-wheel drive), Executive (with front-wheel drive) and Elite (with HTRAC all-wheel drive) and one engine and gearbox derivative.
Across the board, the interior of the Santa Fe offers a very much more refined and ergonomic interior architecture, integrating high-technology components into a dual cockpit layout.
Despite the increased room and comfort for the second and third row passengers – yes this is a seven-seater – you also get remote folding for the second-row seats, 7-inch display infotainment system that navigates through Apple CarPlay, AndroidAuto; Bluetooth link for music, telephone; USB Port and a 3.5-inch information display in the instrument cluster in front of the driver as standard on the Premium and Executive and a top-of-the-range multi-functional unit on the Elite.
The Executive and Elite models add a smart key and keyless start and an electrical closing and opening tailgate.
While the Elite adds heated and ventilated front seats and a rear seat alert. Exact safety spec and standard fitment of various options as per the latest version of Hyundai SmartSense will be known when the SUV arrives in SA.
But a bestin-class range of safety technology ensures that the safety of you and your family will most certainly be met.
.
The Santa Fe also benefits from superior rigidity through the application of high-strength steel, high-impact energy absorption and minimised distortion, to protect passengers in the event of a collision.
The all-new Santa Fe features more high-strength steel than any other Hyundai, with a total content of 57% – 15% more than the previous model.
As said, we are only getting one engine and one gearbox option and they really combine well.
The 2.2-litre CRDI turbodiesel that produces 147kW of power at 3 800pm and 440Nm of torque between 1 750 to 2 750rpm is perfectly matched with the newly developed 8-speed automatic gearbox, which is engineered with a transversal layout.
It offers a more compact set-up and an increased gear span for enhanced performance and reduced fuel consumption.
The gear ratio is widened by 18.3%, resulting in an improved engine response during acceleration. During braking the engine response is improved due to a higher downshifting point.
The higher gear ratio width ensures greater differentiation of the drive modes.
,
The Executive and Premium models are equipped with frontwheel drive, and the Elite model gets Hyundai’s newly in-house developed HTRAC system that is based on four-wheel drive technology.
The name is a combination of the H from Hyundai and the first part of the word ‘traction’. In combination with the drive modes, HTRAC improves acceleration, stability and fuel efficiency.
The system increases traction on snow, gravel and on regular road surfaces while enhancing cornering performance. The ratio of torque distribution is changed with the three drive modes and displayed in the cluster.
In Sport mode, HTRAC delivers improved acceleration with up to 50% torque distributed to the rear wheels, in Comfort mode it offers improved stability with up to 35% torque distributed to the rear wheels and in Eco mode the HTRAC system provides improved fuel efficiency by sending power to the front wheels only.
As to be expected from such a system, in slippery conditions the system automatically distributes power to all four wheels automatically without you having to choose a mode.
The development strategy for the fourth generation Santa Fe’s suspension and steering was to improve responsiveness and vehicle stability while also enhancing comfort and overall quietness.
.
I found this to be spot on. The ride quality was smooth and refined regardless of surface condition.
Aiding this feeling is the fact that the suspension has been stiffened and placed vertically to give a longer travel length for more ride comfort.
Other little tricks are employed like the engine ensuring a softer sound and more linear engine noise with a revised piston design, reducing cold noise by 4dB.
External vertical shock absorbers optimise responsiveness and stability while improving noise, vibration and harshness levels during driving.
And road noise is further reduced by reinforcing the floor panel and incorporating more materials in the carpet. One thing I didn’t really get to test was the medium to high speed dynamics of the Santa Fe.
There were one or two really nice stretches of road that would have made for a great Sunday supercar breakfast run. But our launch drive was strictly controlled in the interest of safety.
.
Besides, even though the SUV comes with a rack-mounted steering (R-MDPS), which is a first for the Santa Fe, and is said to ensure high steering stability at high speeds as well as improved precision and quick steering response at low speeds, I doubt this is the reason you would buy a Santa Fe.
This is a vehicle that is well worth looking at in the segment that offers the Ford Everest, Toyota’s Fortuner and perhaps even some of the premium offers in the BMW and Mercedes-Benz stable.
What we like

Different from the normal styling.
Smooth, eight-speed gearbox/engine combo.
Plenty of interior space.

What we do not like

Styling might not appeal to everybody.
SA not offered all the active safety systems.

Verdict 
This is a stylish SUV that offers space and a refined, smooth drive, and it deserves to do well in the sales race.