“We have instituted 29 forensic investigation and 22 of them have been completed. Some of these investigations include Moretele roads for which payments were done without completion of work, sale of government land and properties, BOP recording studios, Sun City etc,” Education and Sport Development MEC Sello Lehari told reporters.
“We will also pursue former public servants who fraudulently living in government houses for free, costing us thousands of rand in rates and taxes. In this regard we are going to intensify our struggle against greed, crime and corruption without fear or favour. We reiterate the call for people to report all allegations of crime, greed and corruption with evidence to enable law enforcement agencies to do their work.”
Lehari who is the leader of government in the North West provincial government, thanked residents of Mahikeng and people of the province for heeding the call to remain calm following the visit of President Cyril Ramaphosa on April 20.
“Let us cooperate with the police to ensure that the criminal elements are brought to book,” he said.
Residents in Mahikeng went on a rampaged on April 18, shutting down the province’s capital, loot shops and damaged property. They were calling for North West Premier Supra Mahumapelo to resign over allegations of corruption.
The anti-Mahumapelo protest had spilled over to other parts of the province.
ANC regional leaders, the ANC Women’s League and a faction of the ANC Youth League had pledge support for Mahumapelo who is also the provincial chairperson of the ANC to remain as the premier.
The North West House of Traditional Leaders met with Mahumapelo in Sun City near Rustenburg on Thursday, the traditional leaders on Wednesday said they wanted to be part of solutions to the province and wanted to meet Ramaphosa before he made any pronouncement over the future of Mahumapelo.
They also wanted to engage with all those who were calling for Mahumapelo to fall.
North West police said over 400 people have been arrested since the protest started in Mahikeng, on Wednesday night 150 people were arrested in Klerksdorp and Sannieshof, looted goods including a casket were recovered.
– African News Agency (ANA)