Speaking during the opening of the world’s first oxygen production plant worth R2.9 billion in Secunda, Mpumalanga, Environment Affairs Minister Edna Molewa called for more investors to come to South Africa’s shores, Centurion Rekord reports.
Molewa encouraged investors to support South Africa so the country could reach the levels of growth required to meaningfully decrease the rate of unemployment and poverty.
READ MORE: Unemployment, poverty continues to bite ‘forgotten communities’, says DA
She welcomed the partnership between Sasol and Europe-based entity Air Liquide as the country seeks to build its productive capacity and capability.
“This occasion marks one of the great strides in our ongoing efforts as a country to encourage both local and international investments to grow the economy, and ultimately improve the lives of South Africans,” said Molewa.
“The greenfield investment will make a meaningful contribution to a cleaner environment by consuming less electricity and reducing carbon emissions. The addition of this new plant is expected to improve the ability to supply oxygen and argon to the industrial gas market in South Africa.
“I am informed that the production unit meets the highest standards of safety, reliability and efficiency, and includes first-of-its-kind innovation in the air compression process,” Molewa said.
The investment would also address challenges associated with climate change.
“The establishment of this plant holds profound environmental benefits for Sasol and the country and the rest of the world, in the long-term. This development will most certainly reduce the greenhouse gas emissions and create a healthier and cleaner environment for all our people.
“As the world moves more rapidly towards the development of a cleaner and greener economy that promote the principles of sustainable development, there is a need to ensure efficient utilisation of resources, particularly our natural resources,” Molewa said.
She said the plant would go a long way towards ensuring that the habitats, biodiversity and species on which many people have come to depend on for their livelihoods, are preserved for posterity.
Unemployment, poverty continues to bite ‘forgotten communities’, says DA

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.