The brain created the computer, so no wonder the computer is likened to the cerebrum. No mean feat, eh? But there the semblance ends. 
The brain has emotions, thinks for itself and acts impulsively, whereas the electronic jobbie responds to programmed formulae. Why belabour the obvious? See, I’ve been doing a lot of thinking lately about life as we know it – or don’t. Off-the-wall thoughts. 
How about religion. Why so many interpretations? Why Hindus? Why Muslims? Why Protestants? Why Catholics? Why predestination? Why choice? Why baptism by immersion? Why baptism by sprinkling? Divine healing? Then, what about medical healing? 
There are no less than 40 religious groupings in my tiny neck of the woods. Why the need? And how to choose? Who’s right or wrong? 
All this begs the big question (in my little brain): why the palpable hatred and intolerance among this mix that gives lip service to love and forgiveness? “Love thy neighbour”. “Forgive those who hate you”. Say what? 
Reality says otherwise. “Are you Catholic? Oh man, you’re going to purgatory.” 
“Jewish? The chosen race? What about the others?” 
“Old Apostles? So the man is in charge and only his prayers are heard?” 
In little Syria alone there are Shia Muslims/Alawites, Kurds, Turkmen, Assyrians and Druze. At war. Hatred personified. “Where’s the love, Boet?” 
What about political systems? Democracy? Ruled by a few with no thought of the masses. Dictatorship? Ruled by one despot at the expense of the masses. What’s the difference between the two systems? And why are the masses led by their noses to accept unacceptable systems? 
Somewhere along the line the human brain must’ve been attacked by an evil virus, much worse than the Trojan, with no known antidote. It’s a virus worming its way into the human frame, causing untold misery and pain. 
Or is it only my brain that’s affected? Maybe it’s because of my dad’s advice: “You have a brain. Think things out for yourself and don’t be hoodwinked by fools.” 
Maybe I’m the fool, the reason behind my dumb questioning. And my dad got it wrong, and I should accept things as they are.
Cliff Buchler.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.