“We received 17 wounded today, one of whom succumbed to his wounds,” Olivat Alison Aimee Rakoto, head of the hospital HJRA in Antanannarivo, told AFP. He did not specify if the injured were protesters or police.
Authorities had earlier in the week declared the protest illegal but opposition activists defied the order and forged ahead with the demonstration which saw thousands throng a public square outside city hall in the capital of Antananarivo. 
Clashes erupted after police fired tear gas to try to disperse the protesters as the crowd grew and overwhelmed the security forces, occupying the square, an AFP reporter at the scene said. 
Some of the opposition supporters reacted by hurling rocks at the officers.

Police help an injured officer after clashes erupted at an opposition demonstration against new election laws in Madagascar

There was no immediate comment from authorities on the protests.
The opposition has accused the government of President Hery Rajaonarimampianina of wanting to muzzle it through new electoral laws in the run-up to presidential and legislative elections due to be held in late November or December.
The opposition claims that three new laws, adopted earlier this month, favour the ruling party and put in place obstacles to the disadvantage of opponents. 
Rajaonarimampianina is out of the country on official business, according to his office, which did not specify where he was.
“The message to the president of the republic who is out of the country, is that it would be good that you remain where you are,” an opposition lawmaker Hanitriniaina Razafimanantsoa said.
Elected in 2013, Rajaonarimampianina has not yet announced whether he will stand for re-election.
But two former heads of state have already mooted runs: Marc Ravalomanana, who was president from 2002 to 2009, and Andry Rajoelina, who removed him during a coup. 
Both were barred from running in 2013 and their parties were behind Saturday’s protests. 

Opposition activists in Madagascar staged a mass demonstration in Antananarivo to protest against new election lawa they say favour the ruling party

The Indian Ocean island nation endured several years of turmoil after Ravalomanana was ousted as president in a 2009 coup that led to the withdrawal of foreign investment and donor money.
Ravalomanana was overthrown in 2009 after an army mutiny that allowed Rajoelina — then Antananarivo mayor — to become the country’s unelected transition president until 2014. 
Rajaonarimampianina’s arrival in power brought an end to a long series of political crises in Madagascar.