Tyral Ramday, a 14-year-old Asoka Secondary pupil from Chatsworth in Durban, who was diagnosed with a terminal heart condition at birth, is undergoing trauma counselling and medical treatment after he was allegedly physically assaulted and threatened by a teacher at the school last Thursday.
Rising Sun Chatsworth reports that the pupil’s irate father, Shaneel Ramday, claims the incident occurred at about 10am when a group of children allegedly threw stones into the teacher’s class.
“The teacher assumed that the first group of children he saw were responsible for throwing stones and asked them to go into his class one at a time. When my son went inside the classroom, the teacher told him that he has two options: either transfer and f**k off or get three strikes. He forced my son to hold the desk and bend over. He then struck him numerous times on his behind and legs. When he cried out and turned around, the teacher slapped him repeatedly,” he claimed.
The teacher in question has been absent from school since. According to the father, after assaulting the Grade 9 pupil, the teacher gave him a tissue to dry his eyes and threatened to kill him if he told anyone about the incident.
“My son was unable to walk or talk after the brutal assault. His friend had to carry him to the principal’s office. His face also swelled up like a balloon. My child does not want to return to school as he is scared for his life. Tyral is not himself since the incident and is receiving counselling from a social worker. I also do not want this teacher to set foot in another school. I would never want another child to suffer what my child had gone through,” added Ramday.
The bruise marks left on Tyral’s face following the assault.

Paediatric cardiologist at Inkosi Albert Luthuli Central Hospital Dr E Losman issued a report stating that Tyral had been a patient at the hospital since he was five-years-old.
“This child is a firm favourite of the department of paediatric xardiology and his entire family. He has been very upset and much more disabled since the incident with his teacher. Corporal punishment has been abolished. I hope proper action will be taken in this regard,” the statement stated.
The principal of the school, Mr Jhetam, could not comment on the matter since he claims it is sub judice, but he said that members of school do not condone any form of corporal punishment.
“The issue has been reported to the department of education. My duty is the safety of the children and to ensure that all of the stakeholders coexist in harmony,” he said.
Meanwhile, spokesman of the department of education, Kwazi Mthethwa said: “Corporal punishment is not allowed in our schools and it was abolished in 1996. It is against the law and we shall follow the case through. The department of education condemns such acts.”
The governing body chairman of the school, Patrick Ndlovu, was unable to comment on the incident since he was newly appointed.