Opening batsman Dean Elgar believes the power of the South African bowling attack is such that even though their three pacemen are all carrying injuries, even if they are at just 60% capacity they should still be able to seal a 3-1 series win over Australia at the Wanderers on Tuesday.
Australia, chasing an implausible 612 to level the series, struggled to 88 for three at stumps on the fourth day, leaving the Proteas seven wickets away from beating their arch-rivals in a series on home soil for the first time since 1970.
Morne Morkel, who had to stop bowling after 12.2 overs in the first innings with a side strain, led the way with an outstanding spell of two for 18 in eight overs, while Kagiso Rabada (back strain) and Vernon Philander (groin) were not far off their best either.
“We’ve had a few bowlers that have pulled up with niggles and it was a bit of a concern for us if they would be able to bowl in the second innings. Thank goodness they could actually get through quite a few overs for us and bowl well on a pitch that is assisting them quite nicely. If we’ve got them running at 60% it’s going to be awesome for us on the last day.
“Getting a lead of over 600 is a first for me and I’m glad I was in the happier dressingroom. It’s down to the good cricket we’re playing at the moment and I don’t think we must take for granted what our bowlers did in the first innings. They bowled very well and we were able to get a good lead. It’s a bit of a weary Australian side, they’ve been through quite a lot over the last two weeks and they should be tired,” Elgar said after stumps on Monday.
Some eyebrows were raised at the Wanderers on Monday after South Africa batted through to tea before declaring, but a team that leads by 267 runs on first innings by the middle of the third day can afford to take their time. Elgar dropped anchor for over six hours in scoring 81 and captain Faf du Plessis became more and more fluent as he bounced back into form with a great 120.
“With so much time left in the game I knew that it was ultimately my job to just try and anchor the innings and try and put up a substantial lead. We were in a fortunate position, which doesn’t really happen in Test cricket. I think it was important for someone to drive it home by spending some time at the crease. We were fortunate with Faf playing a superb knock today and with myself being able to extend our lead in quite a good way.
“I think it comes down to trying to nail the basics of batting and just trying to be hungry out there with a lot of discipline with regards to defence. The pitch is not the easiest, but Faf made it look quite easy. I’ve had a brilliant battle with Nathan Lyon and I can’t wait for the next one. It’s a battle between two guys who are highly competitive. He has had the edge over me, but I know he has also bowled a helluva lot of balls at me and I’ve frustrated him. He’s someone I know I’ll have a beer with afterwards,” Elgar said.
ALSO READ:
Injured Morne Morkel launches one last spell of glory

For more sport your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.