The idea of a rainbow nation in South Africa is nothing but a dream. 
If the mourning of Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was anything to go by, it goes to show that her ex-husband’s vision to unite the country as the rainbow nation was nothing but a vision. 
We are still divided – worse even because now its hidden, masked by smiles of pretence and nodding of heads that do not really agree with what is being said. 
The rainbow nation is nothing but cosmetic; it’s beautiful to sell our story that as a nation we buried the scars of the past and together built our country. 
As some embraced the #IAmWinnie campaign, there were those who jested at the sadness; those who did not understand why she deserved an official state funeral. 
Her significance was not in who paid her salary or what title she held in office, but that she had been a robust figure in this democracy that we celebrate today – she was an integral part of why today we can boldly occupy any park bench without having to wonder if it’s designated for a skin colour… 
Let us rather shine a light on our pain. A portion of the population has stood firm on the rhetoric of the apartheid government, painting all with the paint of negativity. Allow the people to mourn those considered heroes because their thankless sacrifices is the very reason for our emancipation. 
When AWB leader Eugene Terre’Blanche died, the Afrikaner minority mourned. When controversial singer Steve Hofmeyr leaves this world, he too will have mourners. We may not understand their loyalty, but we have no place questioning it … 
Understanding should have been the founding stones of our country. If, as a nation, we cannot tolerate and understand each other, how do we expect foreigners to see us as a country united? If in times of pain we cannot come together, we will easily fail in times of happiness and cheer! 
We are deeply scarred by the wounds of yesteryear. We have not forgiven … 
Until the day we are honest with who we are, we will have incidences of intolerance such as the Vicki Mombergs and Penny Sparrows …
Kekeletso Nakeli-Dhliwayo.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.