Seven municipal ward by-elections will take place in three provinces on Wednesday, the Electoral Commission of SA (IEC) said.
Two independent candidates and 30 candidates from seven political parties are contesting the by-elections.
In the North West, Ward 15 in Ditsobotla Municipality will be contested by an independent candidate, the African National Congress (ANC), Democratic Alliance (DA), Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) and the Vryheidsfront Plus (VF Plus).
The ward was previously represented by the ANC, and became vacant as a result of the death of the councillor.
In Gauteng, Ward 72 in The City of Johannesburg will be contested by the ANC, DA and EFF. The ward was previously represented by the DA, and became vacant as a result of the resignation of the councillor.
Ward 88 in the City of Johannesburg will be contested by an independent candidate, the ANC, DA and EFF. The ward was previously represented by the DA, and became vacant as a result of the resignation of the councillor.
Ward 92 in the City of Johannesburg will be  contested by the African Independent Congress (AIC), ANC, DA and the EFF. The ward was previously represented by the ANC, and became vacant as a result of the resignation of the councillor.
Ward 47 in Tshwane metro is being contested by the ANC, the DA and EFF.  The ward was previously represented by the DA, and became vacant as a result of the resignation of the councillor.
In the Western Cape there are two by-elections, including Ward 10 in Breede Valley Municipality, which is to be contested by the African Christian Democratic Party (ACDP), ANC, the Breedevallei Onafhanklik (BO),  DA, EFF and VF Plus.
The ward was previously represented by the DA, and became vacant as a result of the resignation of the councillor.
Ward 18 in George municipality will be contested by the ACDP, the ANC, DA, EFF and VF Plus. The ward was previously represented by the DA and became vacant as a result of the resignation of the councillor.


– African News Agency (ANA)



For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter. For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.