Pascale Lamche’s award-winning documentary, Winnie, exposes the extent of the apartheid regime’s propaganda to neutralise Winnie Madikizela-Mandela as a political force and sway public opinion against her.
“We will destroy that woman,” were the words of General Hendrik van den Bergh, head of the intelligence apparatus in the 1960s and ’70s.
In the documentary, the director of Stratcom (Covert Strategic Communications) Vic McPherson reveals the details of Operation Romulus – a counter-revolutionary strategy that had Madikizela-Mandela as its primary target.
In the clip below, Madikizela-Mandela herself explained how she has always been aware that journalists were recruited to form part of StatCom operations – and she drops a few names that may raise eyebrows with readers.
“I was not made by the media, so I am me made by the masses of this country. I pride myself in that. I don’t buy editors to write nice stories about me. I am just one of the Soweto residents, and I am quite content to be that person.
READ MORE: They were all spying on Winnie, claims former apartheid cop
“In the years, I really got terribly disillusioned with the media because some of them were actually used by the then apartheid state. There were reporters who specialised in writing very negative stories about me, like Thandi Gqubule, a girl who was called Nomavenda [Mathiane],” Madikizela-Mandela can be heard sharing in the clip.
She then asked the interviewer if she had come across those names when she was digging, and she says yes.
“They were working for what was then called the Weekly Mail. I was pleasantly surprised to see Anton Harber talk like that [giggles] because he was the editor of then Weekly Mail and the Weekly Mail at the time was so anti-ANC, anti-me.
“They actually did the job for StratCom, it was all about strategic communications, what I have just explained. Seventy percent and thirty percent lies. And they used the Weekly Mail, and it was a very respected paper. If you were front page in the Weekly Mail, you were demonised,” Madikizela-Mandela explained.


CBC, eNCA, Reuters get social media drubbing for ‘insulting’ Winnie