The Inkatha Freedom Party in Gauteng has rejected allegations of being involved in suspicious tender processes in the Johannesburg Roads Agency (JRA).
The coalition party is responding to investigative reports made by Carte Blanche and amaBhungane at the weekend of dubious tender processes allegedly spotted within the Johannesburg Roads Agency (JRA). The IFP says they see the allegations as an aim to discredit the coalition government in the City of Johannesburg.
“Together with the executive mayor, we are working with the city’s Group Forensic and Investigation Services, and await the outcome of the investigation into these allegations.”
The IFP said they put it on record that they had not and never had been involved themselves in “procurement or tender-related issues of the entity”.
Councillor Nonhlanhla Makhuba, who represents the IFP in the mayoral committee, has been tasked with the responsibility of oversight to ensure that the JRA achieves its set objectives, according to the party.
“We want to state that there is no direct relationship between the MMC for transport and the EFF, apart from being voting partners of the coalition, voting on matters of common interest in council.”
IFP chairperson in Gauteng Bonginkosi Dhlamini says the ongoing investigation has his full support.
“The MMC for transport in Gauteng has the IFP’s full support and confidence to thoroughly implement the recommendations which are going to come out of this investigation,” he says.
“As the IFP, we remain committed to the fight against corruption in this coalition government of the City of Johannesburg.”
AmaBhungane and Carte Blanche reported there were dubious contracts and staff exoduses that had shaken the JRA under its IFP-aligned board over the past year. They accuse mayor Herman Mashaba of ignoring corruption at the agency to appease his coalition partners.
The allegations indicate that at the heart of the JRA’s internal ructions, there were attempts by its chairperson to control tenders, “as well as a disputed contract to repair the M1 Double Decker highway, a major Johannesburg thoroughfare”.
AmaBhungane claim to have seen submissions written by the JRA’s former managing director, in which he is said to have detailed attempts by the board chairperson to control the awarding of tenders. This according to the investigations unit led to the former director’s resignation.