When Alssakhra won his first race there was a lot of talk that he was going to be a factor in the three-year-old classic races. However, he has disappointed since and remains just a one-time winner.
But trainer Paul Peter may have found the right race with the right jockey this time when he runs in Race 7 today, a MR 74 Handicap over 1500m on the Vaal Classic track. He is coming back in distance but is also dropping in class. In his past few races he has been competing in races with an average merit rating in the eighties but on this occasion that has dropped to 71. 
While he has placed over 2000m, Alssakhra has always given the impression he will be better over this kind of distance. He is carded to carry 62kg but with the choice of apprentice Dylan Lerena in the irons this son of Seventh Rock will be able to claim the 4kg allowance and that should make him most competitive. 
In his last race, which was over 1800m, Alssakhra overraced and was caught in the final 200m and ended up in fifth spot. However, he was still just two lengths off the winner, Bold Viking. Over this distance the horses travel faster and that should allow him to settle better.
His main danger looks to be another talented three-year-old in Prince Swarovski. Geoff Woodruff’s charge is also lightly raced and should also be suited to the course and distance.  This son of Silvano was probably a little unlucky to lose last time as jockey Marco van Rensburg lost his rein late in the race and his mount only went down by 0.60 lengths to Wheel Of Time.
This time Callan Murray takes the ride and they are nicely drawn at No 4, which is important on this track, especially over this distance which begins close to the turn.
Trip To Paradise will soon be six years old but he still manages to be up in the firing line when it matters most. Trainer Coenie de Beer has a small string of horses but does pretty well with them and this son of Trippi has been a good soldier for the yard. In 34 starts he has notched up four wins and placed on 12 other occasions. Gunter Wrogemann has ridden him in his last two starts producing a win and a 3.10-length fourth behind the useful Bush Pilot.  
Wrogemann is in deadly form and one needs to take note of anything he rides. 
For more sport your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.