A man drowned at Kleinmond near Hermanus on the Southern Cape coastline southeast of Cape Town and another was successfully rescued, along with two lifeguards, with the assistance of bystanders at Port Edward on the KwaZulu-Natal South Coast, the National Sea Rescue Institute (NSRI) said on Saturday.
NSRI Hermanus duty crew were activated at 2.18pm on Saturday afternoon following multiple eyewitness reports of a drowning in progress at Kleinmond, NSRI Hermanus duty coxswain Stephan Malherbe said.
The sea rescue craft Jaytee III was towed to the scene and launched. Police, ER24 ambulance service, and the Western Cape government health EMS also responded.
A man, 63, from Table View in Cape Town but originally from Windhoek in Namibia, had been swept off rocks into the surf and was seen to be in difficulty in the surf, Malherbe said.
“Alec Mackenzie, 30, from Somerset West, who was nearby at the time, heard of the incident and grabbed his diving gear, and he grabbed a bystander’s body board … he launched into the surf and reached the casualty about 200 metres offshore floating face down in the water and he was able to get the casualty on to the body board and then drifted with the surf currents until the NSRI sea rescue craft reached them.”
Both men were taken on board the sea rescue craft and NSRI medics initiated cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) efforts on the 63-year-old man. On reaching the Kleinmond slipway, NSRI medics and paramedics continued with CPR efforts.
“The man was transported to hospital by EMS ambulance with CPR efforts continuing… NSRI paramedics went in the ambulance to hospital assisting the EMS paramedics with the ongoing CPR efforts which were continued in hospital, but sadly after all CPR efforts were exhausted, the man has been declared deceased. Condolences are conveyed to family. Alec Mackenzie is commended for his actions taken today [Saturday],” Malherbe said.
In an earlier incident in KwaZulu-Natal, NSRI Port Edward duty crew were activated at 9.20am following reports of a drowning in progress at Silver Beach, NSRI Port Edward station commander John Nicholas said.
Police search and rescue and KwaZulu-Natal private ambulance services responded and NSRI Port Edward crew towed the Discovery Rescue Runner to the scene.
On arrival on the scene the NSRI found everybody involved safely ashore. It appeared that a 51-year-old man from Nelspruit in Mpumalanga was swept out to sea by rip-currents. Two lifeguards on duty at the beach launched into the surf and reached the man, but they were unable to get back to shore against strong rip-currents, he said.
“Dave Stern, aged in his 50s, and his son Luke,13, from Durban and who are regulars at Port Edward, witnessed the lifeguards and the casualty caught in rip currents and they called NSRI to raise the alarm, and then knowing that NSRI were on their way they voluntarily grabbed two lifeguard Malibu rescue boards from the lifeguards post on the beach and they launched into the surf and were able to rescue the casualty and assist both lifeguards and all five reached the beach using the Malibu rescue boards,” Nicholas said.
The man was medically examined by paramedics and found to not be injured and no further assistance was required. Dave and Luke Stern were commended for their action, he said.
– African News Agency (ANA)