DA federal executive committee (Fedex) chairperson James Selfe this afternoon informed The Citizen in writing that the matter of allegations of conflict of interest against Joburg mayor Herman Mashaba has been resolved.
“This matter was resolved between Mr Mashaba and me. It was established that the reports were untrue,” Selfe said in response to whether Mashaba provided “facts” to him.
He had previously informed The Citizen he will request him to do so.
At the end of March 2018, ANC Johannesburg region accused Mashaba of undue interference that resulted in the awarding of an “inflated” funding to the tune of R11 million to an NGO he previously chaired called Field Band Foundation.
Other accusations included that the NGO only made a formal application for funding after Mashaba had suggested their name to the MMC for social development in the City, and that the funding was never advertised publicly.
Asked to comment on behalf of the Fedex on the matter a few hours later, Selfe informed The Citizen he would be communicating to Mashaba to ask him to provide “facts” around the allegations against the Joburg mayor.
READ MORE: Mashaba concedes he suggested City of Joburg should fund NGO he chaired
Selfe’s response on whether Free State chair Patricia Kopane sought and obtained permission to attend the EFF-led Winnie Madikizela-Mandela memorial service held at Brandfort contradicted what Kopane said earlier.
In a telephonic interview, Kopane told The Citizen there was no need to obtain permission, as the invitation had been extended to Mmusi Maimane, who in turn delegated her as the provincial chair to attend the gathering.
Selfe said Kopane requested for permission to attend the memorial service, and this “was discussed in a leadership teleconference”. Kopane had earlier reiterated to The Citizen she never proactively sought any permission, as she was simply instructed to fill in Maimane’s shoes.
Selfe was also asked why Patricia de Lille was not allowed to attend events in her personal capacity, particularly because she never purported to be representing the DA during the memorial service.
“Every leader in the DA knows that he or she does not have the latitude to attend political events in their ‘personal’ capacity. We expect them to inform the party leadership that they are doing so, as a courtesy,” Selfe said.
Free State chair scrambles to explain why DA must punish De Lille for EFF appearance