At its Federal Congress this weekend, the DA rejected racial quotas for its leadership and instead will extend grassroots representation at congresses.
Re-elected party leader Mmusi Maimane said the party would continue with a democratic electoral process to determine its executives. This was after the DA’s federal executive rejected the wording of Maimane’s proposed diversity clause, which was criticised for bordering on a race quota.
The party added a clause in its constitution which expressed its outright rejection of quotas. The diversity clause reads: “South Africa is a richly diverse society. Though our people come from different origins, worship in different ways and have different cultures and customs, we are all unique individuals.
“Diversity is one of South Africa’s greatest assets. The party celebrates diversity and recognises the right of each individual to be who they want to be, free from domination by others.
“The party solemnly subscribes to the preamble for the constitution of South Africa, which recognises the injustices of the past and affirms that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our diversity.
“The party will continue to take active steps to promote and advance diversity in its own ranks.”
Mmaimane also defended the election of only one woman, Refiloe Nt’sekhe, into the federal executive as deputy federal chairperson, saying the party had diverse leadership at provincial level and in its youth and women’s structures.
Nt’sekhe said she was honoured to be elected democratically by a diverse set of delegates. She added that she believed she was elected into the leadership because of her competency, not on the basis of gender or skin colour.
According to Maimane, racial quotas do not work in a political system as it interferes with the democratic process.
“Diversity is the output not the input. You can’t manipulate democratic outcomes. It is a democratic outcome that delivered us this,” he said.
DA is the only party uniting South Africans, says Maimane

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.