Stories abound of extraordinary relationships between man and animals. Dogs especially play a large part in these almost human accounts. For blind people dogs are not only trained to lead, but to protect.
It’s an inexplicable bonding between human brain and animal instinct – a phenomenon for Creationists and Darwinists to ponder.
An example of this uncanny tie-up emerged close to home. Dagmar lost her husband, Boet, too soon. But he left behind a legacy money couldn’t buy: Cajan, a puppy they shared during the short-lived partnership.
In a sense, Cajan had replaced Boet, and for the last 13 years dog and mistress had become a union that saw both through the pining for the master and heartache for the husband.
The two became inseparable, Dagmar even refusing to go into a village for seniors where dogs are disallowed.
Daily walkies became an institution and watches could be set by those who saw the familiar sight of the two, whatever the weather.
At night, Cajan, despite his diminutive size, became both watchdog and alarm system, a fail-safe deterrent more effective than state-of-the-art gadgetry.
Cajan also entered the world of entertainment, appearing on television and in newspapers. In addition, he was star pupil at training school.
Then the inevitable: Cajan took ill, and for the last year Dagmar spent her days between the vet and home, never leaving his side. But the illness deteriorated and the harsh decision confronted Dagmar: to have her life’s pal suffer a little longer or have him put out of his misery.
For a time Dagmar clung to the first option, unable to imagine herself being without Boet incarnate, going through the same heartache as when losing her first love.
Cajan, sensing her dilemma, clung to life, trying desperately to wag his tail and keep his eyes open, giving his precious pal some hope that he’ll pull through.
Sadly, the illness won and the decision was no longer an option. Today Dagmar finds comfort in the belief that both her partners, Boet and Cajan, have been united in the beyond and will be awaiting her to complete a unique union of man and dog.
A faith, unlike some, worth clinging to.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.