Just as most people were digesting the news of the passing away of anti-apartheid stalwart Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, some social media users took the opportunity to exploit the situation for five seconds of infamy.
Zola Ndwandwe, whose previous tweets make it abundantly clear she is a member of the DA and whose bio previously claimed that she is an Ernst & Young (EY) Africa “ambassador”, was one of those.
“Eyo listen people your hero Winnie Mandela said the nation will be liberated through necklacing and matches, that’s pure Satanic…So yah Wafa Sathane [the devil died]. People’s kids died but we must all be worried about one person. Lest we forget Stompie, Stompie my hero,” Ndwandwe tweeted.
A fair amount of users took issue with Ndwandwe’s tweet, saying she was “callous” and “uncouth” and should rather reserve her comments and let the Madikizela-Mandela family grieve without this unnecessary obtrusion. And she soon found herself in trouble as EY Africa was notified of her tweets promptly.


The flurry of complaints to the purported employer continued.


In a series of tweets, Ndwandwe attempted to distance her “employer” from her tweets and apologies. In one of the tweets, she even stated that if either the Democratic Alliance and EY Africa fired her for her tweets, she would be fine with that.


Nobesuthu Mashego from EY Africa this afternoon forwarded a company response on the matter to The Citizen, reiterating Ndwandwe was never really an “ambassador” for the company.
“Earlier today, we became aware of a university student sending tweets purporting to be from EY. This person is neither an employee nor a spokesperson for our firm. She previously received a bursary from EY, which ended in 2015. We distance ourselves from these tweets,” EY said in the statement.
 Some Twitter users lamented that those who were hurt by the tweets were trying to have Ndwandwe punished for having an opinion.
Zuma was elected because ANC male leaders were scared of Winnie, says Malema