The Market Theatre precinct remains at the forefront of producing and presenting cutting-edge work with an authentic African artistic voice.
This is according to Minister of Arts and Culture,Nathi Mthethwa, speaking at the official launch of the new state-of-the-art building, Market Square, on 28 March, City Buzz reports.
READ MORE: Market Theatre goes digital with savvy new website
Mthethwa said the precinct was inclusive of the rich tapestry of African diversity. He said that with a subsidy from the department of arts and culture, the 42-year old institution had been able to enliven the Newtown cultural feel.
Mthethwa said the new building, which is adjacent to the famous Market Theatre, houses a new Market Theatre Laboratory that offers acting classes to aspiring actors, the Market Photo Workshop and the Market Theatre Foundation’s administrative headquarters.
Department of Arts and Culture Minister Nathi Mthethwa with Kwanele Gumbi, chairman of the council of the Market Theatre Foundation.
Kwanele Gumbi, chairman of the council of the Market Theatre Foundation, said that futures for aspiring artists were made at the Market Theatre.
“We cement the careers of artists and present work of international acclaim. The Market Square building is a campus where we can sculpture [sic] the future of the young people and safeguard the legacy of the old,” said Gumbi.
“For some, they see a building, and for us, we see a platform and a stage for continuous improvement in the arts.”
Mthethwa commended the Market Theatre managers for giving new impetus to the inner city of Johannesburg.
KMH Architects, the designers of the building, were also in attendance and showed off the new international award they received at an award ceremony in London recently. The company was awarded for designing the best-performing arts space last year.
Minister of Arts and Culture, Nathi Mthethwa with Kwanele Gumbi, chairman of the Council of the Market Theatre Foundation touring the Market Theatre precinct after launching the new Market Square building.

Barney Simon and Mannie Mannim are behind the establishment of the Market Theatre, in an effort to celebrate and promote the best in international architecture for performing arts venues.
“The 42-year-old Market Theatre is a proud legacy to its founding fathers, Simon and Mannim.
“The Market Square will be a continuation of that legacy, and it will be a reminder of the vision of those who took the baton from the founding fathers of the Market Theatre”, said Ismail Mahomed, the CEO of the Market Theatre Foundation.
Details: lusandaz@markettheatre.co.za
Market Theatre goes digital with savvy new website


For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.