Swimming star Chad le Clos earned his third medal on Sunday and lawn bowler Colleen Piketh secured the national bowls team’s first of the Gold Coast Commonwealth Games, with the SA squad closing the fourth day of competition with a total of nine in the bag.
Le Clos, who had already scooped two golds, finished second in the men’s 100m freestyle final in 48.15, sharing silver with Australian Kyle Chalmers who touched in the same time.
Duncan Scott of Scotland chased him down to win gold in 48.02.
“I’m very happy, very proud. I could see him (Scott) coming behind me and I was like ‘argh, please don’t. But I’m happy with my swim. You can’t complain about a personal best,” Le Cos said.
“If we could get 20 minutes to warm down, I’d love to go again.”
The South African went on to qualify fourth fastest in 52.56 for Monday’s 100m butterfly final, while Tatjana Schoenmaker was quickest (1:06.65) into the 100m breaststroke final, Cameron van der Burgh clocked 26.95 to qualify second fastest for the 50m breaststroke final, and Erin Gallagher touched the wall in 54.38 to book her place in the 100m freestyle final.
Brad Tandy and Michael Houlie will join Van der Burgh in the 50m breaststroke final.
Kate Beavon qualified for the 800m freestyle final.
Piketh beat Canadian opponent Kelly McKerihen 21-17 in the women’s singles bronze medal playoff.
“This is an awesome feeling of pride. It’s an accomplishment that any sportsman would aspire to achieve,” she said of her third career Commonwealth medal.
Meanwhile, the women’s fours bowls team qualified for today’s gold medal playoff against Australia.
Sprinters Akani Simbine (10.12) and Henricho Bruintjies (10.26) clocked the second fastest times in their heats to qualify for today’s 100m final, and Orazio Cremona’s 19.24m effort was enough to progress to the medal battle in the shot put on the opening day of track and field competition.
Elsewhere, weightlifter Celestie Engelbrecht finished seventh in the women’s 69kg division, lifting a total of 193kg, the SA men’s hockey team lost 6-0 to New Zealand in their fourth group game, remaining without a win, the Proteas netball side lost 60-38 to Australia, as they saw their medal hopes slip away, and track cyclist Steven van Heerden finished 18th in the men’s 40km points race.
The SA team were lying seventh in the medals table with four gold, one silver and four bronze heading into the fifth day of competition.
ALSO READ:
Red-hot Schoenmaker in line for a second gold

For more sport your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.