It is not every day that you find a man begging on the streets for girls’ comfort items, but Thapelo “Bartin” Letsoalo has made it his priority..
The 28-year-old Letsoalo from Klipgat is the founder of “Walk and Hike with Bartin”, a non-profit organisation that prides itself on helping female matriculants in need of sanitary towels, Pretoria North Rekord reports.
READ MORE: African tour operator supports campaign to provide sanitary towels to school girls
Letsoalo said he was well aware that there were many other campaigns driving the same cause, but is sure that his is unique.
“I am the first male from Klipgat to have such a campaign. When have you seen a man standing at the robots asking sanitary towels or people walking and hiking on the street in search of sanitary towels? It is very unlikely,” said Letsoalo.
Thapelo Letsoalo, a 28-year-old from Klipgat, collects sanitary pads and donates to young girls at various schools in Klipgat.
He said the name of his campaign, “Walk and Hike with Bartin”, represented what the initiative stood for.
“I host fun walks and in order for people to join, they have to pay a registration fee of R30 or donate two packs of sanitary towels. We then walk and hike from Klipgat to Sammy Marks, where we collect donations for sanitary pads,” he explained.
Letsoalo said his passion was inspired by an incident in 2012, after he witnessed a young girl at a tuck-shop who had her first period but did not have money for sanitary pads.
He said shockingly, her friends teased her and would not help her.
Letsoalo stepped in and bought the girl a pack of sanitary pads and from that day he carried on helping other young girls where needs be.
“Before that day, I was ignorant. I was not aware that lack of sanitary pads was a huge problem. My perspective changed since that day,” said Letsoalo.
The campaign has managed to donate sanitary towels to girls at Klipgat Secondary School, Fumani Secondary School and Diphetogo Secondary School.
“I also plan on donating to other schools in around Pretoria in the near future,” said Letsoalo.
African tour operator supports campaign to provide sanitary towels to school girls

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.