Business Leadership South Africa (BLSA) today said it has developed a set of ambitious proposals to form part of its 2018 socio-economic engagement agenda with social partners in a bid to help the country’s efforts towards inclusive growth and transformation.
BLSA chief executive Bonang Mohale said transformation was a vitally important issue for South Africa and their members. 
“We need to be open and honest about progress or lack thereof on transformation and opening up opportunities for black South Africans in the private sector, and on what has not worked or been pursued effectively in the past, and what needs to be done,” Mohale said at BLSA offices in Sandton.
“We need a commitment that leadership will look beyond the ‘tick box compliance’ and recognise that this is a long overdue business and moral imperative, and each leader should drive this with their full personal commitment.”
BLSA added it would be talking with political parties in a bid resolve the impasse between government and business following the adopting of a motion to amend section 25 of the Constitution to expropriate land without compensation. 
“For our part, we will be participating in this process, and we plan to engage both the African National Congress and the Economic Freedom Fighters which sponsored the motion in Parliament.”
Mohale said BLSA had taken note of the extensive consultative process outlined by the chairperson of the parliamentary ad hoc constitutional review committee, Vincent Smith, saying that all South Africans must make their views heard on this important matter.
“We want to work with all social partners on solutions that address the hardships of the past adequately without damaging the long-term sustainability of South Africa as an investment destination,” Mohale said.
Mohale also committed BLSA to working with law enforcement agencies on bringing state capture and corruption cases to court speedily, protecting anti-corruption whistle-blowers, working with the new Sars leadership to restore tax morality and expediting VAT refunds, and assisting in ensuring that social grants reach their intended beneficiaries.
 
– African News Agency (ANA)
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.