Orlando Stadium in Soweto is a hive of activity ahead of the funeral service of struggle icon Winnie Nomzamo Madikizela-Mandela, who will be laid to rest on Saturday.
Members of the Johannesburg Metro Police Department (JMPD) and South African Police Service (SAPS) had a busy day on Friday, as they were controlling traffic and ensuring that only accredited people are allowed access inside the stadium.
On transportation of mourners on Saturday, acting director-general for Government Communication and Information System (GCIS), Phumla Williams said the park-and-ride buses are expected to be at Nasrec Train Station gate 1 or 2 at about 4am, where they will transport people to the stadium.
“We expect that the transportation of mourners will be concluded by 7.30am because the funeral programme is scheduled to begin at 9 am,” Williams said.
JMPD spokesperson Wayne Minnaar said all roads around the stadium would be closed from Friday, ahead of the escort of the guard of honour, which is expected to start at 3pm from Kopano Street to Winnie Mandela’s home.
Minnaar said mourners should on Saturday park at the Nasrec Expo Centre, where they will use the park-and-ride facilities to the stadium.
“The funeral procession is expected to leave Orlando Stadium at about midday tomorrow,” he said.
Minnaar said the procession to Fourways Memorial Park was expected to be between 12pm and about 1pm, adding that no roads would be blocked off prior to the procession.
“All the roads will be opened, except for when the procession is on route to Fourways Memorial Park. We will have officers from Tshwane Metro Police, Gauteng Traffic Police, National Traffic Police, JMPD and SAPS on duty to divert traffic as we move along, and also for security,” Minnaar said.
Minnaar said an investigation is under way following rumours that a group of people in Diepsloot is planning to disrupt the funeral during the procession to Fourways.
Meanwhile, the National Joint Operational and Intelligence Structures (NATJOINTS) have discouraged parents and guardians from bringing young children to the funeral of Madikizela-Mandela.
NATJOINTS said mourners would also not be allowed to enter the stadium with dangerous weapons, alcohol or any illegal substances, including spears, sticks or knobkerries.
“Hawkers will not be allowed to enter the security perimeter around Orlando Stadium. They may sell their goods outside the security zone. Mourners should cooperate with law enforcement officers and the designated marshals to ensure the smooth running for the funeral,” NATJOINTS said
ALSO READ: UPDATE: Mother of child thrown off roof in police custody
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.