As South Africans take to the roads to their vacation destinations or to visit family and loved ones during this Easter holiday season, emergency services provider Netcare 911 has announced that it has embarked on a project to upgrade the design of its ambulances ahead of the holiday season, Randfontein Herald reports.
READ MORE: Ambulance attacked while responding to emergency in Honeydew
The project ensures further improvement regarding the safety of Netcare 911’s patients, other road users and its emergency services personnel.
“Netcare 911 will once again be mobilising its full complement of personnel and emergency vehicles to assist South Africans around the country in the unfortunate event that they have a medical emergency,” said Shalen Ramduth, director of business development and support services at Netcare 911.
According to Ramduth, most of the changes to the vehicles have to do with improving their visibility on the roads.
“Time is of the essence in a medical emergency and it is therefore critical for our ambulances to get to the scene as rapidly as possible.
“To achieve this safely, other road users need to be aware of, and to give way to, these emergency vehicles. We have consequently added additional warning lights to the vehicles.”
The brand new ambulances, seven of which have already been delivered to Netcare 911, have been fitted with a large protective bull-bar, as well as floodlights that can be used to light an accident or other emergency scene where this may be necessary, especially at night.
“The siren units have been fitted on to the bullbar for maximum audio benefit to road users, so that the ambulance siren can be heard from a distance.
Additional LED cluster lights have been added to the bullbar at a 45 degree angle to enhance visibility through intersections.”
Ramduth said that Netcare 911 uses purpose-built Volkswagen T6s to meet its exacting ambulance requirements.
“Nothing is left to chance in the design of these vehicles, which are equipped with the latest in emergency medical, navigation and communication technologies.”
“The ambulance has a large cabin area, which gives our emergency services personnel plenty of space in which to care for their patients efficiently and ensure maximum patient comfort during transport.
“The VW T6 also offers excellent stability, occupant safety, reliability and performance. All of our new vehicles will be developed to the new design specifications,” observed Ramduth.
“We are at all times trying to ensure that the patients in our care are provided with the highest quality and safest emergency medical care. We will, as always, be on high alert during this holiday season.
“Should you find yourself in a position where people are in need of urgent medical attention, please do not hesitate to call us on 082 911,” he concluded.
Ambulance attacked while responding to emergency in Honeydew

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.