The Democratic Alliance (DA) seems determined to get rid of Cape Town mayor Patricia de Lille, as a fresh move has been hatched to use the new recall policy to kick her out of the party.
This after the party caucus in the Cape Town Metro resolved today to ask permission from the federal executive to table another motion of no confidence in De Lille, using the new recall policy passed at the recent federal congress. The move appears to be in line with De Lille’s own statement that the De Lille Clause, as the recall policy is known, was merely passed for her and to get rid of her from the DA.
Last week the party leadership denied that the recall rule was directed at De Lille and dismissed allegations that it was planning to take her to task for attending and addressing an EFF-initiated memorial service for the late ANC stalwart Winnie Madikizela-Mandela in the Free State. While party national spokesperson, Refiloe Nt’sekhe described the report of the pending action as “lies”, DA leader Mmusi Maimane said De Lille had to account for her actions, and federal council chairperson James Selfe insisted that there was nothing precluding the submission of a fresh anti-de Lille motion of no confidence in council.
The new recall policy requires that the federal executive must ask the affected public representative to resign within 48 hours after the passing of the motion, failing which the member’s party membership is automatically terminated. This appears to be the direction that the De Lille issue is taking presently.
De Lille, who is a struggle veteran with a pan-Africanist background, is facing a disciplinary action from the DA which charged her for allegedly putting the name of the party into disrepute and allegations of corruption. After addressing the EFF rally last week, she was rumoured to be planning to join the Red Berets, a party led by the socialist oriented Julius Malema.
Following today’s caucus meeting, DA Metro caucus deputy leader JP Smith said they resolved to submit a new motion of no-confidence in De Lille. They would write and ask the federal executive to give permission for the motion.
De Lille, who was not available for comment today, appeared prepared to use all means at her disposal to clear her name from the allegations. She asked for a fair disciplinary process.
Last week political analyst Sanusha Naidu said although De Lille is yet to reveal her intentions if the DA fired her, her attendance at the EFF gathering was bound to land her in trouble with the DA. Naidu said she was still a DA member until her enquiry was concluded and therefore the party could take an exception to her being a guest and addressing a gathering of a rival party
The EFF is also gunning for the head of DA mayor Athol Trollip in the Nelson Mandela Bay metro and is campaigning for him to be removed through a motion of no-confidence. But indications are that the motion might be defeated because Trollip is being supported by two other smaller parties, which would give him the majority he needs to remain in his seat.
– ericn@citizen.co.za
Also read: Mazibuko, Khoza back Patricia de Lille and slam DA
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.