The state security minister has restored intelligence inspector-general Setlhomamaru Dintwe’s security clearance and undertook to provide him with all classified information required for his investigations. 
This is after Dintwe approached the High Court in Pretoria for an interdict to stop former State Security Agency (SSA) director-general Arthur Fraser from interfering with his probe. The application was removed from the urgent court roll after an agreement was reached between the parties. 
Fraser was on Tuesday removed from his position at the request of President Cyril Ramaphosa and appointed as commissioner of correctional services. 
The office of the inspector-general said in a statement Fraser’s withdrawal of Dintwe’s security clearance had been unlawful, and was meant to frustrate his investigations against Fraser. They also warned that his removal did not bring an end to the investigations. 
The statement says State Security Minister Dipuo Letsatsi-Duba had set aside the withdrawal of Dintwe’s security clearance on Wednesday night and, with the SSA’s acting director-general, Loyiso Jafta, confirmed Dintwe would be provided with all classified information and the execution of his functions wouldn’t be interfered with. 
“The inspector-general is grateful for the minister’s intervention in the matter and will immediately continue with the execution of his functions …,” he said. “It is of critical importance that the inspector-general must be protected from any interference with the execution of his constitutional mandate.” 
Dintwe said his high court application for several sections of the Intelligence Services Oversight Act to be declared unconstitutional would continue. 
“The inspector-general will engage with the newly appointed acting director-general, the minister and the joint standing committee on intelligence with a view to reaching consensus on a legislative framework that would enable [him] to properly execute his constitutional mandate,” the statement read. 
Dintwe alleged in an affidavit that Fraser had intimidated him to stonewall an investigation into his [Fraser’s] conduct, flowing from a complaint by the DA. 
The allegations included that Fraser had established an illegal rogue intelligence programme, called the Principle Agent Network, by copying the signature of the then intelligence minister Ronnie Kasrils. 
It was also alleged that he had improperly influenced the awarding of contracts to his family members through the network and that he had created an alternative intelligence capacity, which constituted a criminal offence.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.