Thandeka Gqubule-Mbeki will only issue a statement after information in award-winning documentary Winnie, produced by Pascale Lamche, suggested she was a ‘Strategic Communications’ (StratCom) journalist.
In the documentary, Madikizela-Mandela explained to Lamche how StratCom’s covert operation aimed at distributing negative and damaging information about her during apartheid was carried both locally and internationally.
Madikizela-Mandela said she was “pleasantly surprised” with Anton Harber’s Damascun turn, as he was the editor of the Weekly Mail during the height of StratCom operations. After leaving the Mail & Guardian, formerly known as Weekly Mail, where he was an editor, Harber joined eNCA as editor-in-chief, and is currently an adjunct professor of journalism at Wits University.
WATCH: ‘Gqubule and Mathiane were StratCom reporters at the Weekly Mail’
Although Harber is not directly implicated, Madikizela-Mandela implied there were two black woman reporters at the Weekly Mail who were operatives. “Thandi Gqubule and a girl named Nomavenda,” she said.
Records show that current SABC economics editor Thandeka Gqubule-Mbeki and author Nomavenda Mthiyane at some point worked for the Weekly Mail.
Gqubule-Mandela, a US-educated journalist and former Rhodes University lecturer, shot to prominence during the SABC ad-hoc Committee hearings into the rot at the public broadcaster. She gave a harrowing testimony of how diary meetings at the public broadcaster were a sham and often former COO Hlaudi Motsoeneng henchmen would shut down any story not in line with a pro-Zuma narrative.
That she could have been a StratCom journalist has both thrilled some people and aggravated emotions on social media. The reactions continue to stream into various social media platforms amid a robust debate.








When contacted this morning, the soft-spoken Gqubule-Mbeki said after consultation with her family, she has decided not to issue any media statement or comment on the allegations out of respect.
“After consulting my family, and out of respect for ANC’s declaration of 10 days of mourning leading to the funeral tomorrow, and also out of respect for Winnie Madikizela-Mandela’s daughters, I will not be commenting.
“After the funeral, and once again after consulting the church, family members and my legal representative, I will only be able to issue a statement then. This could perhaps be some time next week,” she explained.
Earlier this morning, her brother, Duma Gqubule, expressed annoyance that even he was expected to respond to the insinuations.

 
Sanef calls for proof that journalists were part of Mama Winnie smear campaign