The bail hearing of four people accused of kidnapping, robbing, assaulting, and murdering Cape Town-based botanists 73-year-old Rodney and 64-year-old Rachel Saunders was postponed again today, after proceedings stalled in the Verulam Magistrate’s Court due to one accused rejecting his legal aid attorney.
Husband and wife Fatima Patel, 27, and Sayefudeen Del Vecchio, 37, and Thembamandla Xulu, 19, and Ahmad Jackson Mussa, 36, known as Bazooka, appeared before magistrate Chris Annamalai, who was standing in for magistrate Valaramen Kathravaloo.
All four have been charged with kidnapping, assault, robbery and – more recently – the murders of the Saunders couple.
Del Vecchio and Patel are also facing terrorism charges.
Malawian national Mussa was the last suspect to be arrested on March 22, in a case that has made international headlines.
Xulu’s bail bid was rejected, and while today’s proceedings were for a bail bid for Patel, the court heard that Del Vecchio would also be applying.
However, court proceedings were substantially stalled as Mussa rejected his legal aid defence twice, and making use of a court translator, said he wanted private representation.
The instructing attorney for Patel and Del Vecchio, Johannesburg-based Nadeem Mohamed, was chastised by Annamalai after it was found that Mohamed had entered the holding cells at the court with Mussa’s legal aid lawyer and spoken to the suspect during a recess.
This was a conflict of interest, according to Annamalai, who said Mohamed should have known better and should have followed protocol if he wanted to represent Mussa.
Mohamed also represented Patel and her brother last year after the siblings were found in possession of bullets and a stun grenade during a police raid in 2016.
On the same day, police raided the home of the Thulsie twins, who were arrested on terrorism charges and are alleged to have links to the Islamic State (ISIS) terrorist group. Mohamed at the time denied the Patels had any link to the Thulsie case and both were released on R5 000 bail.
The Saunders, dual British and South African passport holders, went missing between 10 and 15 February at or near Bivane Dam in the Vryheid area in KwaZulu-Natal, where they were thought to be searching for rare plants.
Hawks spokesperson captain Lloyd Ramovha, told African News Agency this morning that the search for the missing couple “or their bodies” was continuing.
An affidavit filed in March by investigating officer, Detective Warrant Officer Anuresh Lutchman, who is based in the Crimes Against the State Unit in the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation (known as the Hawks), revealed details about an alleged premeditated plot to murder the Saunders’ and dispose of their bodies.
Lutchman’s affidavit also describes how he found a flag at the premises of Patel and Del Vecchio that was “consistent with the flags that are used by ISIS to show support and membership of the terrorist organisation”.
Other items found included a drone, camping equipment, two generators and paintball equipment, amongst others, all purchased with Rachel Saunders’ bank card. A GPS device belonging to the couple was also discovered. The couple’s Toyota Land Cruiser was also recovered in the Verulam area, with human blood inside the cargo area.
Del Veccchio was also allegedly advising someone via Telegram on bomb making, while Patel was alleged to have helped a 15-year-old teenager “to join ISIL in April 2015”, according to the affidavit.
All four accused will appear again on 25 and 26 April.
– African News Agency (ANA)
Also read: Affidavit reveals chilling details of Cape botanists’ kidnapping
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.