Twenty-nine people were injured, three critically, in two separate road accidents involving minibus taxis in Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal on Saturday morning, paramedics said.
Twelve people were injured when the minibus taxi they were travelling in veered off the road and crashed into a house along Marinda Road in Boksburg, Ekurhuleni on Saturday morning.
ER24 paramedics, along with another private service, arrived on the scene at 8am, finding that a minibus had veered off the road and crashed into a home, ER24 spokesman Russel Meiring said.
Eight children, aged between 12 and 18, and four adults were found on the scene. Paramedics assessed the patients and found that two adults had sustained numerous injured and were in a critical condition. The two other adults and eight children had sustained injuries ranging from minor to moderate.
Paramedics treated the patients and provided the two critically injured with advanced life support interventions. Once treated, one of the critically injured was airlifted by the ER24 Oneplan helicopter while the second was airlifted by another private helicopter, both to Sunshine Hospital.
The remaining patients were transported by ambulance to Sunshine Hospital for further treatment. Local authorities were on the scene to investigate the cause of the crash, Meiring said.
In the second crash, seventeen people were injured when a minibus taxi and car collided on the R56 in Dawnville in KwaZulu-Natal, he said.
“ER24 paramedics, along with other services, arrived on the scene to find both vehicles at the bottom of the embankment, the taxi lying on its roof. Several people were found either seated or lying around both the vehicles.”
Paramedics assessed the patients and found that one man had sustained numerous injuries and was in a critical condition. Sixteen other patients were found to have sustained minor to moderate injuries.
Paramedics treated the patients and provided the critically injured man with advanced life support interventions. Once treated, the patients were transported to various hospitals in the area for further treatment. The cause of the crash was not yet known, Meiring said.
– African News Agency (ANA)