Limpopo police commissioner Lt-Gen Nneke Ledwaba on Sunday condemned the violent protest which erupted in the Waterval policing area after two people were killed during an armed robbery.
Two people died during a house robbery at Bungeni Basani village in the Waterval area outside Makhado at about 8.30pm on Saturday night, Lt-Col Moatshe Ngoepe said.
It was alleged that a 43-year-old woman was at her homestead together with her children when they were attacked by three unknown armed suspects. The men demanded money and cellphones. However, before the victims could respond, the assailants started shooting randomly, wounding the woman and her 19 and 21-year-old sons. Her 25-year-old daughter died instantly. The woman and her two sons were taken to hospital for medical treatment, Ngoepe said.
“During the scuffle, one of the suspects was also shot… allegedly by his accomplices before they fled the scene and disappeared in the darkness after they robbed the victims [of] their three cellphones.”
Police were notified and reacted swiftly, finding “this suspect lying dead a distance away from the victims’ house”. The three stolen cellphones and R1200 in cash were found in his possession. Cases of murder, attempted murder, and house robbery were opened. The three wounded victims were recuperating in a hospital with serious gunshot wounds, Ngoepe said.
“Responding to the incident, members of the community at Basani Mtsetweni and the surrounding villages went on [the] rampage and barricaded the roads between Diza and Mashau villages with various objects.”
Ledwaba warned members of the community to keep calm and refrain from any form of violence, including damage to property. They should give police space to investigate and deal with the incident.
“The deceased suspect is still unknown and his accomplices are still on the run and there is no arrest. Anyone who can assist the police in arresting these suspects may contact the crime stop number 08600-10111 or the crime line sms 32211 or the nearest police station,” Ngoepe said.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.