The African National Congress launched the Winnie Madikizela-Mandela Day of Service in Orlando, Soweto, today to celebrate the life of the anti-apartheid icon.
The party’s spokesperson said this forms part of the ruling party’s 10-day programme to honour Madikizela-Mandela.
The launch included the starting up of Winnie Mandela food gardens the party expects will be rolled out throughout the country.
The launch also coincided with renovation works done at child-headed homes and homes for the elderly in the area.
ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule presided over the launch and said part of the organisation’s resolutions at last year’s conference were to ensure food security for the country, in particular the poor.
“You can’t just talk about the land, but the land that people have must be utilised, they must till the soil so that we have organic food and we lead a healthy lifestyle,” Magashule said.
He said with the Winnie Mandela food gardens the party expects its community-based structures to be invigorated and to go throughout its locales to ensure that each household has a food garden.
“The programme gives expression to the immediate struggle waged by Mama Winnie Madikizela-Mandela for most of her life to better the conditions of those that are marginalised in society.
“To honour the memory of this gigantic icon, the ANC encourages the masses of our people throughout the country to work their land in their yards, schools and villages and to produce their own food in honour of Mama Winnie Madikizela – Mandela,” the party said.
The ANC voted in favour of an EFF parliamentary motion on land expropriation with no compensation after it had made amendments to it.
The matter will now be reviewed by parliament’s joint constitutional review committee which is expected to report back to parliament by the end of August.
The public will be able to weigh in on the parliamentary review of section 25 of the Constitution between May and June this year and essentially give their input on the government’s plan to expropriate land without compensation.
It is expected that this month the committee will publish an advertisement for oral and written submissions.
After the advertisement is placed, the public will be given one month to make submissions. The committee will then commence with public hearings in all provinces.
WATCH THE LAUNCH OF THE WINNIE FOOD GARDENS BELOW: 

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.