A robbery that turned out to be a sick joke took place at the Mr Price in Middelburg’s Groblersdal Mall around midday yesterday, Middelburg Observer reports.
Two ‘robbers’ slipped into the Mr Price, clad in balaclavas, sunglasses, gloves and black jackets, and ran straight towards the pay points.
READ MORE: Armed robbery at East Rand Mall
The victim, who wishes to remain anonymous, saw the two robbers, and was so shocked that she did not know how to react.
When the “robbers” got to the pay points at the store, their colleagues recognised them, and everyone burst out laughing.
“For them it was one big joke, and they kept saying that we were all fooled and that we should accept the joke. This is unacceptable that personnel of a business behave like this in front of clients,” the victim said.
The woman insisted on speaking to the manager of the Mr Price, but she was told that he was not at work.
The woman then approached Gunmar Security and told the security guards what happened in the store.
“I immediately felt protected by Gunmar Security’s guard, who accompanied me to the store. He explained that the behaviour of the staff was unacceptable, but his pleas were ignored,” she explained.
The woman was so upset that she struggled to drive home. She was later taken to a doctor and treated for shock.
“I will never set foot in Mr Price again, as I will never feel safe doing shopping there.”
The woman’s trauma was exacerbated when a robber tried to steal her handbag at a nearby intersection after the incident. She hit the thief with a water bottle, which chased him away.
The woman has previously been through two violent robberies, where family members were assaulted in front of her.
Middelburg Observer contact the absent Mr Price manager, who again was not available. The customer service centre said that they would provide the publication with a number of a communications officer of Mr Price.
This article was translated from Afrikaans.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.