Customer service is truly the lifeblood of any small business. Small businesses generally can’t compete with big box stores and bigger corporations on price, but customer service can provide small businesses with a competitive edge - if you do it right. So this Customer Service Makeover focuses on making sure that your small business provides the kind of customer service that builds customer loyalty, gives positive word-of-mouth advertising, and increases sales - in short, the good, better or even superior customer service that consumers want. Before you can improve your customer service, you need to find out what it’s like at this point in time for customers/clients to do business with you. The best way to do this is to interview or survey your customers/clients. Put some extra eyes on your customer service provides suggestions for eliciting feedback from your customers. When you’re seeking your customers’ views of your customer service, remember that customers measure customer service in specifics. Customer doesn’t rate your customer service as “good”, “fair” or “poor”; he or she pays attention to how you answer the phone or how he or she was treated when asking for help. Always, use the customer service feedback that you’ve collected to choose one or two specific aspects of customer service to improve. For good customer service all you have to do is treat all your customers like you would like to be treated. Be very clear about exactly what you want the people providing customer service to do. Focus on the different customer service interactions that are most common in your business. In my article I will focus on answering the phone, a customer wanting help and a customer making a return or complaint, this is because these are three of the most common customer contact points for most small businesses. Choose to work through one or more of these common customer interactions as part of your customer service makeover. The phone is still often the first point of contact with your customers, so it’s critical that the way your business phone is answered gives the person calling a good first impression of your business. If you are trying to assess your own customer service performance on the phone, have someone else listen to your side of the call and assess it; you won’t be able to handle the call properly if you’re trying to evaluate it at the same time. In assessing several calls, you should have a clear guide as to how your customer service phone performance measures up. Another situation to evaluate yourself is when customer is seeking help in person. This is the most common customer service interaction so it’s extremely important to get it right. Customer complaints and returns are also extremely common customer service interactions. Providing good customer service for a customer with a return depends on two factors; your business’s return policy and the way you and/or your staff interact with the customer during the return process. In all the above situations about customer service, you need to take time and assess yourself and your entire team in how they handle these situations when serving your customers. You need to assess both your return policy and how well you and/or your staff deal with customers who are trying to return items. After assessing several such situations, that is when you can improve your customer service as needed. In handling customer complaints. There are two differences that are important to bear in mind when trying to improve customer service for customer complaints: Customers making complaints need to feel they are being listened to. Listen actively by making eye contact, nodding, or even jotting down a note. Ask clarifying questions when the customer is finished speaking if necessary to get more details that will enable you to solve the customer’s problem. Do not interrupt a customer when he or she is speaking. Customers making complaints need closing action. When a customer makes a return, the close of the customer service interaction is the customer getting her money back or something else of value. A customer making a complaint needs to get something of value out of the exchange, too; some action relevant to the complaint, whether it be a promise to follow up or a future discount.