In little more than a month’s time, Kimberley in the Northern Cape is about to be rocked – and it’s the brightest young minds the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) is hoping to rock the most.
From military bands to hardware and ordnance, it’s the home of the Big Hole’s turn to host South Africa’s annual Armed Forces Day.
Recruitment of young blood into the force has dropped over the years from 10 000 a year to 3 000, due to budget cuts.
“Armed Forces Day is actually on February 21, but there is a week of activities,” said spokesperson Siphiwe Dlamini, pictured.
“These activities are to make sure that young people, in particular, are exposed to the opportunities that are in the defence force.”
Despite the budget cuts, Dlamini said huge interest still remained. But he had a word of caution for those who were simply looking for a job.
“We are not an employment agency. If you want to join the defence force it must be a calling and you must be patriotic to the defence force and the country,” Dlamini said.
“And your results must be good. The time of ‘oh I’ve failed’ or ‘my results are bad I’m going to the defence force or the police’, verby! “We want good results because we deal with jets that are high tech; we deal with ships which are high tech; engineers, we want very good results.”
The event has a number of objectives aside from attracting fresh minds into the SANDF.
One is to honour the 860 people of the South African Native Labour Corps who died on the SS Mendi on February 21, 1917, South Africa’s biggest single wartime loss.
Another is about bringing members of the SANDF and the public together.
“We are celebrating the heroes and heroines of the SANDF, those who are still alive and those who have died,” said Dlamini.
The capability demonstration with live fire will take place at the De Brug military base in the Free State during the week. There will be military installations from many of the SANDF’s units – and with more than 6 500 to be billeted in Kimberley, SANDF officers predicted a huge boost for the local economy.
SANDF feels the economy squeeze




For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter. For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter. For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter. For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.