Dar es Salaam. As campaigning for next month’s by-elections in Kinondoni and Siha slowly begins, the National Electoral Commission (NEC) faces a major hurdle resolving the voter apathy dilemma that haunted the January 13 polls. Low voter turnout marred by-elections in Singida North, Songea Urban and Longido constituencies a week ago. The ruling CCM claimed a landslide victory in all the three constituencies. But the opposition under the coalition Ukawa umbrella boycotted the polls. This was in protest against what it said was the decision by the authorities to turn a deaf ear to its demands for free and fair elections, following the controversial November 26, 2017 by-elections in 43 wards across the country. The opposition cited a plethora of flaws during the by-elections, including alleged interference by state security agencies, ostensibly to influence the vote in favour of the ruling party. The effect of that boycott was apparent in the poor turnout a fortnight ago when only 110,883 of the 278,167 registered voters took part in the three constituencies, according reports by returning officers.  Credibility question Analysts are of the opinion that there is a credibility question when 167,284 registered voters, equivalent to 60.14 per cent, fail to cast their ballot. They are now urging the government to find a lasting solution to the threat of voter apathy in future elections. Prof Gaudence Mpangala of Ruaha Catholic University (Rucu) says if the negative trend is not addressed, there is a possibility that it may put a damper on the 2020 general election. “The country may be subjected to a tense political situation if a solution is not sought,” he told Political Platform in a telephone interview. ” Though they may be varying factors behind poor voter turnout, analysts generally agree that the opposition coalition’s boycott decision is playing a significant role. Parties forming the coalition are Chadema, NCCR-Mageuzi, Civic United Front, National League for Democracy and Chama cha Ukombozi wa Umma. The Zitto Kabwe-led ACT-Wazalendo is not part of the coalition but it has also vowed not to take part in next month’s by-elections unless opposition demands are met. “We will try talking to other opposition parties that have not announced their participation in the by-elections, and try to influence them against taking part in the Kinondoni and Siha constituency by-elections,” the party’s deputy secretary-general Msafiri Mtemelwa said at the weekend. He accused NEC of failing to address what he described as “burning issues” that have left the country’s democracy at a “crossroads”. On December 11, last year, Chadema national chairman Freeman Mbowe announced that all political parties forming Ukawa would boycott by-elections if the government fails to convene a stakeholders’ meeting to address electoral irregularities. There is also a feeling that restrictions imposed by the government in 2016 against political rallies and demonstrations could yet be another reason for low voter turnout, apparently due to the lack of that voter excitement associated with campaigning and lobbying. Dr Charles Kitima, former St Augustine University of Tanzania (Saut) vice chancellor, says it will be difficult to predict what impact voter apathy will have on 2020 because of the changing dynamics of politics in the country. However, he urged consensus on the burning issues. He also said there is need to respect the country’s laws and wishes of the people. University of Dar es Salaam political science lecturer Elijah Kondi concurs. He says it’s too early to talk about the possibility of voter apathy haunting 2020. But he is also quick to point out that the contentious issues need to be addressed.  What should be done? The solution, Prof Mpangala notes, lies in the strengthening of cooperation and solidarity between opposition parties. He is also of the opinion that the restoration of the new Katiba writing process could play a catalytic role in addressing the prevailing challenges. “Civil Society Organisations, academicians, the media and all the other democracy stakeholders should support political parties in this movement,” he said in a telephone interview. Mr Kondi concurred. He expressed optimism that the new constitution had the potential to correct the weaknesses recorded during the recent by-elections. “Why did people demand the document? It is because they saw weaknesses needed to be corrected in the process to democratise the country,” he said. “However, since stakeholders are discouraged on how process can be revived, only political will remains the hope for the process to continue.”