Dar es Salaam. The premier football league for Mainland Tanzania continues in five venues today, but all eyes – most of them, anyway! – will be on the encounter pitting defending champions Young Africans Sports Club (Yanga) and Azam Football Club (Azam) at the Azam Complex in Dar es Salaam. The match is considered important for the two teams which fight to reduce the gap in the league standing which is now led by Simba Sports Club (Simba). The current league standing does not allow Yanga and Azam fans to shout ‘Hurray’ from the housetops, as they are ranked below the Msimbazi Street soccer giants Simba – with Simba already having put 32 points under the belt. Azam is second – with 30 points to their credit – while Yanga is third, with 25 points. Azam would topple Simba if they win today’s encounter, while Young Africans will simply reduce the gap of up to four points against the list leader. If the teams draw the match, then they will only widen the points gap with Simba, perhaps, not for long as Simba plays Majimaji soccer club at the Uhuru Stadium in Dar es Salaam tomorrow. Young Africans assistant coach Shadrack Nsajigwa says they have taken the necessary steps to ensure that they come out with the best results. Nsajigwa said victory is very important in their mission to clinch the Championship title for the fourth time. “We have trained well ahead of the match, and believe we will make the team fans happy. My players showed a good game in previous matches – and they are committed and ready for the encounter,” said Nsajigwa. Young Africans will miss the services of its four players – Zimbabweans Donald Ngoma and Thabani Kamusoko – who are still nursing injuries. Also on the ‘missing’ list are Abdallah ‘Ninja’ Shaibu and Pius Buswita, who is serving a one-match ban. The team’s striking force has been boosted with the return of Zambian striker Obrey Chirwa and speedy winger Geofrey Mwashiuya. Chirwa was serving a three-match ban, while Mwashiuya was sick. Azam FC Information Officer Jaffer Idd said they need victory in order to make their fans happy. Azam won 2-0 against Tanzania Prisons at the Sokoine Stadium in Mbeya during its previous match. “We are ready for the encounter, my players trained well, and they are optimistic of delivering the best – despite the fact that it will be a difficult encounter,” said Iddi.