Angela Prosper Ntepa is the writer of a Swahili book titled ‘Vitu vya kufanya wakati unapopitia kipindi kigumu’ (Things to do when you’re going through hard times). Angela did her primary education at Mlimani Primary School and did her O’level at Kambangwa secondary school. She went to Laurete International School for her A ‘level education and joined Mzumbe University for higher level education. The talented author speaks to Success  When did you first realise you wanted to be a writer? The idea came to me five years ago, but I needed time to perfect the craft and learn more about writing books.  How long does it take you to write a book? It depends with the knowledge and ability of the author. I can’t really specify.  What is your work schedule like when you’re writing? My schedule is a little bit complicated because I’m a counselor and an author. But I spend at least two hours every day writing my books.  What would you say is your interesting writing quirk? Before I write a book I normally post a lot of posts on social media. Many people like my posts, which means I engage more with them. I remember one of my posts got so many shares and likes when I posted it on social media, meaning the message got to reach many people.  Where do you get your information or ideas for your books? I get information through people’s experiences but most of it are my own experiences.  When did you write your first book? I wrote my first book last year  What does your family think of your writing? They are proud of me. The good thing is that my parents are writers too. My father (Prosper Ntepa) has written 40 books and my mother (Debora Ntepa) has written 12 books in English, Swahili, French and Portuguese, and they really support me.  What was one of the most surprising things you learned when writing your books? Success is not easy as people think; if someone won’t work hard and invest their time it is very hard to achieve anything meaningful. Anything is possible as long as you work hard, you believe in God, and also believing in yourself. If you do what you want to do in life then you can become whoever you want to be. One thing I always avoid is to give up in life no matter the circumstances.  How many books have you written? Which is your favorite? Two books. My favourite is Things to do when you are going through difficult times. Do you hear from your readers much? What kinds of things do they tell you? I have been receiving many good comments about my books from my readers. As a result, I am planning to translate my books in other languages like French this year.  Where can we buy or access your work? My books are available at bookstores. For example, you can find some at a bookstore behind Ubungo Plaza. What genre are your books? My books have general genre.  What is the most important thing that people don’t know about your subject/genre that they need to know? The most important things about my books is giving people strategies on how to win in life in all aspects, by helping them develop a healthy self image, discover the Power of their thoughts, how they can enlarge their vision and find their strength through adversity.  How will you get their attention? Getting people’s attention, especially getting enough of people’s attention to get them to read a book is very hard. For example when I launched my first book it was a time that I was hosting a ladies conference which had more than 500 ladies in attendance within and outside of Dar es saalam and that was my opportunity.  What was your hardest part to write? The hardest scene was sharing part of my failures. It is not easy to share personal things but for the sake of encouraging others I had to share how I overcame some difficult things in my life.  What did you enjoy most about writing this book? Hearing feedback from my readers; for example I was teaching at one place, after finishing teaching someone followed me and thanked me for saving her life. She said my book helped her to have courage to face what she was going through. I really enjoy knowing that my books have helped other people to have hope and courage in life.  How did you get to be where you are in your life today? I want to thank God for giving me the gift of life, my family, working hard. One thing that I have learnt in life is that there are messy moments on the road to destiny; you can’t have progress without having challenges.  Who are some of your favourite authors that you feel were influential in your work? What impact have they had on your writing? My parents Prosper and Debora Ntepa, Carl Mays, Chris Oyakhilome, Charles R.Swindle, Norman Vincent Peale and Robert Sculer. They’ve all contributed to my positive attitude about life. I have reached where I’m because of having plans, enlarging my vision, breaking barriers, raising my expectations, believing I can become whoever I want to be, refusing to quit no matter what I face and choosing to win.