Former Gauteng health Memberof the Executive Council (MEC), Qedani Mahlangu, on Monday, blamed other officials for the botched Life Esidimeni transfers that led to the deaths of 143 mentally ill patients.
Mahlangu told the arbitration hearing that she and Gauteng Premier David Makhura were misled by the former Gauteng mental health head of department (HOD) Dr Barney Selebano and former director of the health department, Dr Makgabo Manamela.
“They misled me and the Premier about the project on their report. I had no reason to doubt them as they are professionals and know right from wrong,” she said.
Mahlangu said her role was to ensure that policies were implemented by holding meetings with the HOD, the public and the media.
“It would be contravening other legislation to go implement things on the ground myself,” she said.
Mahlangu said she was informed by the media that deaths had increased to 68 in September 2016.
Retired chief justice Dikgang Moseneke who is chairing the hearings, asked Mahlangu why she did not stop the project after she heard about the tragedy.
“Patients had already been moved by then,” she replied.
When asked whose decision it was to terminate the contract, Mahlangu said it was a collective decision and insisted that she did not give instructions on the termination of contract. She said if she had known about the problems in the project, she would have acted.
Mahlangu said she could not answer who should be held accountable for the 143 deaths.
Previously, Selebano and Manamela fingered Mahlangu as the person who pushed for the transfer of the patients in a bid to cut costs. They both said they were acting on her directive.
Last week, deputy director of mental health Hannah Jacobus said she was advised by Manamela to break the law and issue out licenses to non-governmental organisation (NGO) without following procedure. Jacobus said Mahlangu was made aware of this information during meetings.
The hearing continues.
– African News Agency (ANA)
 
South Africa’s festive season death toll drops by 11 percent

 
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.