Former Gauteng Health MEC (member of executive council) Qedani Mahlangu — who has been widely blamed for the botched transfer of mentally ill patients to unlicensed non-governmental organisations (NGOs) where 143 died — on Wednesday, denied seeing letters and emails warning against the move.
Advocate Adila Hassim for Section 27 asked Mahlangu about an email sent to her on December 9, 2015, highlighting court action against the department concerning the closing down of the Life Esidimeni group.
Testifying at the Life Esidimeni arbitration hearings in Johannesburg, Mahlangu said she did not see the letter.
Responding to Mahlangu, Hassim said: “But this was threatening litigation.”
Mahlangu responded: “The department is threatened with litigation everyday.”
Retired deputy chief justice Dikgang Moseneke who is chairing the arbitration hearings, interjected and asked Mahlangu if she denies seeing the crucial letters.
She responded: “I don’t remember justice.”
Hassim reminded Mahlangu about an email which was sent to her on February 12, 2016, by project manager Levy Mosenogi, appealing to Mahlangu to change course on the move.
Mahlangu said she was on sick leave during that time and did not see the email.
Looking puzzled, Moseneke asked: “The letter from Mr Mosenogi that raised these concerns inter-departmentally never reached you?”
She replied: “I don’t remember…I was not well. I was recovering at home.”
Hassim continued to drill pertinent questions into Mahlangu, even though she said she had forgotten most of the events which took place during the project.
Hassim asked Mahlangu if she knew about letters and litigation warning against the moving of patient to Takalani, where adults were mixed with children.
Mahlangu retorted: “Can I answer that tomorrow?”
Hassim persisted and told Mahlangu to answer the question, leading to Moseneke interjecting and mentioning that the mixture of men and women at Takalani,  resulted in rape incidents.
Mahlangu requested that all Takalani-related issues be dealt with on Thursday.
“I’m human, I’m likely to forget things,” she said defensively.
Moseneke sounded irritated and reminded Mahlangu that she was provided with transcripts.
”Why would you want to deal with this tomorrow…If you tell a court that Takalani is fine and patients can go there and they get Typhoid. That doesn’t need much memory. Isn’t that plainly wrong?” asked Moseneke.
Mahlangu retorted: “I’m doing the best I can to go through the testimonies. I’m trying my best to come here prepared.”
She explained her previous legal representative had the transcripts last year and she only got the documents on January 10.
Hassim read out an August 2016 report on the low-lights of Precious Angels.
“There is no food menu, most of the food in storage is expired, cleanliness was a problem, patients didn’t have toiletries and they were overcrowded,” Hassim read.
Moseneke came in and enquired about Mahlangu’s actions after discovering the dire conditions at Precious Angels.
“Look at that long list of troubles. You looked at that and thought everything would be alright?” asked Moseneke.
Mahlangu replied saying: “It’s issues I was told would be sorted out.”
When asked if she was aware of the job losses that occurred after shutting down Life Esidimeni, Mahlangu said it was the responsibility of former head of mental health Dr Barney Selebano and the human resources department to make sure employees were employed on the department.
The hearing continues on Thursday.
– African News Agency (ANA)
Former Gauteng health MEC, Mahlangu, shifts blame for Life Esidimeni deaths


For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter. For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.