The ANCYL greater Tshwane region maintains they have applied to the City of Tshwane for their planned mass shutdown on Friday, but Tshwane metro police (TMPD) only approved an application from a group called “All Tshwane Vat Alles Employees”.
“The request by ‘All Tshwane Vat Alles Employees’ received a thorough consideration which followed by an approval, granted by TMPD.
“The TMPD has noted information doing the rounds about another protest action by ANCYL scheduled for Friday… In respect of this march, no application was received from ANCYL as the law dictates, therefore, the publicized protest will be treated as illegal in the event it takes placed as professed,” TMPD spokesperson Nonhlanhla Mgiba said.
Flyers have been circulating on social media of a #TshwaneShutdown by the ANCYL greater Tshwane region on Friday, to demand the reinstatement of 11 000 Expanded Public Works Programme’s (EPWP) Vat Alles workers, the cutting down of high rental rates and an end to harassment of informal traders.
Tshwane ANCYL leader Lesego Makhubela said yesterday they would continue to march for the city to appoint thousands of security guards who were left unemployed last year when a contract between the city and contracted security companies came to an end. He said he received information that Tshwane mayor Solly Msimanga had refused to accept their memorandum.
“We are expecting 20 000 people to descend on the street. The march we are leading is with all the workers and for the people of Tshwane. The reason [Msimanga] won’t be available to receive the memorandum is because he knows there has not been any conversation that has taken place between the affected parties.”
Marchers are to gather at Burgers Park at 8AM, and would march onto Lilian Ngoyi Street, to turn right onto Madiba Street until they reach Tshwane House.
They will proceed to the Union Buildings, using Madiba Street, and would march back to Burgers Park using Leyds, Pretorius, Nana Sita, Thabo Sehume streets and Nelson Mandela Drive, Mgiba said.
“The marchers are expected to disperse at 4PM. Motorists are urged to avoid the abovementioned streets and use alternative routes. TMPD officers will be deployed to monitor the ‘All Tshwane Vat Alles Employees’ march and all affected streets.”
rorisangk@citizen.co.za
ANCWL applauds Zuma for meeting presidential hopefuls



For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter. For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter. For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.