Phakamani Hadebe, the interim chief executive of power utility Eskom, conceded on Tuesday that the state-owned company was facing “significant financial challenges” stemming from poor leadership, lack of proper corporate governance and its weak capital structure.
“We are where we are because of poor leadership across the spectrum of Eskom. Decisions that were supposed to be taken were nor taken,” Hadebe said.
Speaking ahead of the release of the Eskom interim results for the six months ending September 30, 2017, Hadebe said the power supplier had performed well operationally, but that the company was in dire straits financially.
Hadebe said the 2.2 percent tariff increase granted by the energy regulator in 2016, declining volume sales, an unqualified audit by external auditors, the escalating municipal arrears debt, and restricted access to funding had contributed to the financial challenges the power utility was facing.
The debt owed by municipalities to Eskom has risen by 33 percent, from R9 billion to R12 billion to date. Hadebe also said Eskom would work closely with the energy regulator to find a price path solution in future.
Hadebe said managing liquidity remained Eskom’s key focus area, adding that “the sustainability of Eskom cannot be maintained through borrowing”.
“When we took over 10 days ago, we were happy to find that the list of lenders, bankers and investors included the people that we know. But when we spoke to them, they made it clear that they cannot fund us unless we deal with corruption within Eskom. Those who are found wanting [on corruption] have to be out of Eskom as soon as possible,” Hadebe said.
“We have already said that government guarantees, although helpful, are not sustainable. We are developing a financial model to correct this.”
The power utility had been struggling to release its interim financials for three months until government appointed a new board and an interim chief executive. A permanent board will be appointed within the next three months.
– African News Agency (ANA)
ALSO READ:
Capitec bank slammed as ‘wolves in sheep’s clothing’ in damning report by Viceroy

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter. 