The Department of Labour will this week resume its national series on worker engagement about the implementation of the national minimum wage and amendments to labour legislation.
The national minimum wage of R3 500 a month, or R20 per hour for major sectors, is scheduled for implementation from 1 May 2018 as agreed at the National Economic Development and Labour Council  (Nedlac), with the exception of sectors such as farm workers, and domestic workers.
The department said that the objective of the worker briefing sessions was to ensure that the national minimum wage as a new labour policy intervention instrument is communicated to all the intended workers.
This also includes educating the workers on the implications of proposed amendments to the Basic Conditions of Employment Act (BCEA), the Labour Relations Act (LRA), the Accord on Collective Bargaining and Industrial Action and the Code of Good Practice on Collective Bargaining, Industrial Action and Picketing.
The briefing sessions on the national minimum wage and amendments to labour legislation started on 9 November 2017 and are targeting all sectors of the economy.
The department’s next worker briefing sessions will be on Thursday 18 January at Emnotweni Tsogo Sun Casino in Nelspruit; and on Friday 19 January at Protea Hotel Marriot in Emalahleni.
Since the start of the roadshows, national minimum wage and labour amendment briefing sessions have been held in Johannesburg, Pretoria, Cape Town, George, Pietermaritzburg, Richards Bay, Durban, Tzaneen, and Polokwane.
The department said that more briefings on the national minimum wage and labour amendments briefing sessions are still to be held in Klerksdorp, Rustenburg, Bloemfontein, Welkom, Umtata, East London, Port Elizabeth, Upington, and culminating in Kimberley.
– African News Agency (ANA)
 
PPF warns CPS over its claims of over R1bn from Sassa

 

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter. For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.