Former late Bophuthatswana leader Kgosi Lucas Mangope was a religious, disciplined and visionary leader, mourners heard on Wednesday.
Speakers took the podium to shower him with praises, they passed nothing but heroic sentiment for the former homeland leader whom they described as someone who was fond of education, agriculture and religion.
They said he was a God-fearing person and had church ministers in his cabinet, started government activities with prayers and dedicated Wednesdays to prayer.
A large number of traditional leaders, friends, family members and community members turned up to bid him farewell.
The Motswedi community hall was filled to capacity and two giant tents that served as overflow areas were also filled.
Motswedi High School, rendered comforting hymns to mourners.
Josias Hlongwa told mourners how the late Mangope was a visionary leader and  passionate about education.
“He had an amazing support for education during his time as a school teacher and the president. He could see far from our horizon…his qualities and products are visible,” said Josias Hlongwa, narrating how Mangope was passionate about education.
He said Mangope was committed to education to such an extend that he commissioned a study investigation into the middle school system before it was implemented in the former homeland.
“He believed in research, he commissioned professors to study the middle school model. The model was researched it was not thumb-sucked,” he said to a chorus of applause from the audience.
He said the middle school concept was necessary as it meant a pupil would go through three examinations before getting to tertiary education.
During her visit to schools in the Madibeng municipality on January 17, Basic Education Minister Angie Motshekga pointed out that the North West province must consider phasing out the middle school system as it was not fitting well in the education system.
Speaker Brigadier Sam Dube said during Mangope’s reign Bophuthatswana was a haven of peace.
“Bophuthatswana was a crime free zone, it was a haven of peace. There were border controls.”
Another speaker Sidney Mothoagae said Mangope created Agrico, an agricultural  parastatal aimed at promoting agriculture in Bophuthatswana.
The crowd shouted down Ramotshere Moilo mayor Kereng Mothoagae, when she tried to explained that it was not easy for the African National Congress-led government post 1994 to build a single country from fragments of homeland it inherited from apartheid South Africa.
The sound system was bad and the crowd could not clearly hear what the mayor said and the crown raised their voices, drowning her as she spoke.
One woman shouted that the mayor’s speech was not the time for her to make a political speech as they were at the hall for a funeral.
Mangope died on January 18 in Motswedi, at the aged of 94. He was the founder of the United Christian Democratic Party (UCDP), in 2011 he was fired from the party for allegedly making unilateral decision and expelling senior party members.
He challenged his expulsion in courts, and the court only restored his party membership and not his leadership. He became president of Bophuthatswana in 1977, one of many independent black homelands which only apartheid South Africa recognised. He had been accused of using police brutality to suppress protest.
In 1988, he was reinstated by the apartheid government following a failed coup led by Rocky Malebana-Metsing, leader of the People Progressive Party.
In 1993, in the build up to the first non-racial elections in South Africa in 1994, Mangope made it clear that Bophuthatswana would remain independent of the new and integrated South Africa and that he would not allow the upcoming elections to take place in “his country”.
He was removed from office by South African Foreign Minister Pik Botha and Transitional Executive Council member Mac Maharaj in March, 1994.
Mangope would be buried in Motswedi near Zeerust on Saturday.
– African News Agency (ANA)
Controversial former Bophuthatswana leader Lucas Mangope dies


For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter. For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.