Followers of champion jockey Anthony Delpech are in for a profitable time today at Scottsville where he has a promising book of rides on the eight-event card.
He has a bright chance of success in Race 4 when teamed up with Greg and Karen Anthony-trained three-time winner Zadora in a MR 66 Handicap (F&M) over 1000m. The four-year-old’s last time at Scottsville was in August when she posted a gutsy close win over 1200m. 
She confirmed her wellbeing with a short-head win over 1200m at Greyville in her penultimate outing and was not disgraced next time when carrying 61kg and finishing fourth over 1200m on the Polytrack at Greyville. With Delpech aboard for the first time the filly should be in the winner’s enclosure.
Her main rivals are Dunzie, Russian Girl and Gotoluvher.
Watch out for two-time winner Timedtoperfection (Delpech) who steps out in Race 5 to have her first outing for the powerful Brett Crawford stable and contests a MR 66 Handicap (F&M) over 1000m. Formerly trained by Corne Spies, the four-year-old filly comes off a rest and trying blinkers this time she could be the one to beat.
Others to be considered are Sapphire Petunia, Vargraves and Class Act.
Brett Crawford-trained three-time winner Hero Quest (Delpech) rates the best bet of the day in Race 6, a MR 72 Handicap over 1950m. Equipped with blinkers in his last two outings at Greyville, the five-year-old swept all aside and should complete the hat-trick.
In with place claims are Storm Ruler, Coys, Wealthy and Defending Champion.
Trainer Glen Kotzen has called on Delpech to partner two-time winner Royal Agree in Race 7, a MR 76 Handicap (F&M) over 1200m. The four-year-old was a fast-finishing close second over the course and distance in her last two outings and the filly is unlikely miss with the champion up for the first time.
Prosecco, Love Theme, Kilmokea and Twice As Smart make most appeal of the remainder.
Crawford and Delpech team up again in Race 8 with Seattle Silva who contests a Maiden Plate (F&M) over 1200m. The filly showed early promise in the Western Cape but then lost form. However, subsequently rested for four months she returned with two encouraging runs in KwaZulu-Natal at Greyville and Scottsville. The four-year-old will step out much fitter this time and has a bright chance to exit the maiden ranks.
The pick of the rest are Lunar Tide, Goa, Roy’s Flute and Gypsy Queen.
 
                                                         Would you like to place a bet on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.