Most tourists and travellers will know the Western Cape for the iconic Cape Town area, with its assortment of world class beaches, wine farms and wonderful hiking trails and nature reserves.
However, there is also a great deal of small towns to explore in the region, which are famous all for their own reasons. With the Garden Route just around the corner and the West Coast just a stone’s throw away, it’s no wonder people love exploring all the small towns and villages for which the Western Cape is famous.
Paternoster – West Coast

This town comes alive during the holiday season, but nothing could ever take away its small town charm which has served a certain community of fisher people for what would seem like forever. Its desolate beauty and quaint restaurants and guest houses have turned it into a sought-after destination for Capetonians looking to escape from the congestion of the city during their holidays.
Barrydale – The Little Karoo

This town, which isn’t far from the popular Afrikaburn festival, has become a haven for misfits and artists looking for tranquil surroundings in which to do their work. The area has a popular hotel which is famous for hosting live music and art exhibitions.
Betty’s Bay – The Overberg

This iconic destination which isn’t far from the popular town of Hermanus, is a great place for a weekend getaway which isn’t far from Cape Town. The area is also famous for its penguins and the scenery is exceptionally beautiful, with picturesque and untouched views of both the icy Atlantic Ocean and the breathtaking Overberg mountain range.
Ceres – Cape Winelands

Ceres is a town famous the world over for being one of the biggest fruit producing towns, not only in the Western Cape, but in the entire country. The popular fruit juice brand ‘Ceres’ named itself after the town and for good reason. The land is believed to be fertile for all varieties of agriculture and the area has been providing excellent produce to the entire Western Cape for many years now.
Mossel Bay – Garden Route

This picturesque and slightly industrious town situated on the outskirts of the Garden Route is great for many reasons. It’s a sleepy town with enough action to keep the big city at bay. It’s also a world class surfing destination and its close proximity to other notable destinations such as Wilderness, Plettenberg Bay or Nature’s Valley has kept it a firm favourite holiday destination for decades.
Nature’s Valley – Garden Route

Nature’s Valley is a tiny holiday village nestled deep in the heart of the Garden Route of South Africa. There really isn’t much there besides an abundance of nature. There is pretty much one shop, one restaurant and a dairy farm on the side of the road on the way in. It’s also the location for the popular Wild Spirit Backpackers who host live music pretty much every other night.
Brought to you by All4Women
Tips on how to travel solo this year

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.