Several houses in Gauteng’s West Rand that have been identified as drug dens and brothels will be demolished as the South African police crack down on crime, Police Minister Fikile Mbalula said on Monday.
He said that no one will be allowed to partake in illegal activities in the country.
“There is no body going to be allowed to roam around doing illegal things including drugs. It does not matter where they come from, we are sweeping the through operation fiela,” Mbalula said.
He was in the West Rand report back to residents in Munsiville and Kagiso about what had been done since their protest a week ago.
At the time, residents shut down Krugersdorp in a protest against human and drug trafficking. Mbalula went to speak to the community and made a commitment to come back in a week to report back.
On Monday, Mbalula the first house was demolished in his presence.
“What you see happening behind us is a starting point, old dilapidated buildings which is a general issue in South Africa in municipalities, we said those building must be destroyed,” he said pointing to a building just about to be demolished,” he said.
He said all buildings used for criminality would be closed down in Krugersdorp and surrounding areas.
“We mean business…We want to warn the community that illegality must not be met by illegality. It means people must protest, if they did not protest we would not have been activated to take decisive actions,” Mbalula said.
“Now we have acted because the community have raised issues. We equally urge ourselves and the leadership in the municipality, let us not wait too long for things that we see are wrong happening in our space. We must be decisive in ensuring that wrong doing that communities are complaining about are brought to book.”
Onlookers ululated as the a bulldozer crushed down the wall of the house operating as as brothel.
“I know he will come back, Minister Mbalula keeps his promises, I am happy that building is down,” said David Mthembu.
Mthembu lives two houses away from the alleged brothel.
“We are so happy, what was happening in that house was not good, thank you Mbalula, our sisters were kept as sex slaves,” he said.
Blankets, shoes and mattresses were found in some of the rooms, condoms were also littered the rooms.
– African News Agency (ANA)
Fikile Mbalula told to share facts, accused of posting fake news on Twitter


For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter. For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.