On Friday, 19 January, the Randfontein Herald received an anonymous call from a fuming traffic officer from the Rand West City Local Municipality (RWCLM) Unit regarding their salaries.
According to him, the salaries of officers at the Westonaria Traffic Department remain higher than those of the Randfontein Traffic officers.
He said despite the merger of the two local municipalities, their salaries have not been adjusted. He also said that they would not receive payment for the overtime they worked, especially after December, but must take time off instead.
READ MORE: Dis-Chem says 760 employees on strike at distribution centre, head office
He told the Herald the disgruntled officers had an appointment with the RWCLM executive mayor, Mzi Khumalo, to discuss the issue, but Khumalo allegedly asked them to wait outside his office. However, they allegedly saw him leaving the premises in his vehicle.
The officers are also not happy with the fact that the mayor allegedly employed four new traffic officers at much higher salaries, despite their job grades being the same.
He emphasised that they would keep going back until the Mayor honoured their appointment.
Tshidiso Thlaripe, Khumalo’s spokesperson, released a statement regarding the issue.
“The traffic officers had a labour issue regarding their overtime payment. Many of them worked during the festive season and are entitled to be paid at the end of January 2018.”
A memo was issued by the municipal manager stipulating that employees within the earning threshold of R205 433.30 as determined by the department of labour are not entitled to overtime pay. As of 1 January 2018, any employee earning beyond this threshold will be compensated by means of days off instead of being paid overtime as before.
The municipal manager and the executive manager for corporate support services subsequently met with the affected parties, and the issue has been resolved.
Dis-Chem says 760 employees on strike at distribution centre, head office

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.