Blame the Proteas’ complacency after securing an early series win.
Or India being gatvol of these Tests already.
Heck, blame the looming Indian Premier League (IPL) auction.
Whatever the reason, Wednesday’s opening act of the third and final Test between the two sides at the Wanderers was a strange, perhaps even poor day of cricket.
Given the high standards of the previous two matches, this was disappointing.
It ended with the Proteas being in control and primed for a 3-0 whitewash after they ended on 6/1 in reply to bowling India out for 187.
Some would be tempted to point out that Virat Kohli’s decision to bat first on a green surface under overcast skies was the first in a comedy of errors.
But there was some logic to it.
If they could survive the initial onslaught – the openers KL Rahul and Murali Vijay couldn’t – against Vernon Philander (2/36), whose seam and swing at times was unplayable, the afternoon sun would bake the pitch and make things easier.
Given how Kolhi (54) and Cheteshwar Pujara (50) resisted, it was a realistic objective.
What those stats don’t show what happened in between.
First, Kolhi played too early at a Kagiso Rabada bouncer but Philander, inexplicably, failed to get a hand to a dolly of a chance at extra cover.
South Africa’s premier quick was on his knees and livid.
It was easy to understand why.
Later on, the Indian captain slashed at a rank, wide long-hop from Morne Morkel (2/47).
AB de Villiers seemed so surprised that Kohli went for it that he dropped the catch at third slip.
At least he made up by holding on his great counterpart’s edge from a drive off Lungi Ngidi (1/27)
It did mean a bruised middle finger for De Villiers that needed treatment.
Pujara’s stay at the crease was comical and fascinating at the same time.
The man clearly isn’t bothered by his scoring rate as his innings took all of 179 balls.
But it was painstaking stuff.
It took Pujara 54 balls just to score his first run and he looked hapless initially against Philander and co.
The mistakes continued to pile up.
Philander dismissed Ajinkya Rahane off a no-ball.
Substitute fielder Theunis de Bruyn dropped Mohammed Shami at mid-on though it must be said it was a difficult chance.
Lungi Ngidi backtracked too slowly to get a hand to Bhuvneshwar Kumar’s (30) skied swipe off Rabada and Hardik Pandya top-edged a needless attacking pull when India needed him to contribute.
The Proteas had an awkward 30 minutes to close and it was long enough for Aiden Markram to play at a short-of-a-length delivery off the impressive Kumar, which he didn’t need to.
It was the cherry on top of a very mediocre day of action.
For more sport your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.