A first-of-its-kind drug enforcement summit held in Pretoria recently brought together the likes of the Hawks as well as the US drug enforcement administration (DEA) and the Nigerian national drug law enforcement agency, Centurion Rekord reports.
During the summit, American counter-narcotics professionals discussed the best ways to stop the most prolific traffickers from operating on the African continent and the rest of the world.
READ MORE: Drugs worth R80k recovered, eight arrested in Phoenix KZN
Hawks spokesman Brigadier Hangwani Mulaudzi said through improved multilateral efforts, the meeting sought to eliminate illicit drug trafficking, money laundering and narco-terrorism (terrorism associated with the trade of illegal drugs).
“This will be done by fostering stronger co-ordination and ensuring no shelter is provided for transnational criminal organisations operating in Africa,” Mulaudzi said.
The DEA’s regional director Andre Kellum reconfirmed the organisation’s commitment to the African continent.
“We appreciate the opportunity to find new effective ways to work with our African partners to combat those who peddle harmful substances and support narco-terrorism,” Kellum said.
The efforts of the SAPS national commissioner General Kehla Sithole and the Hawks’ acting national head Lieutenant-General Yolisa Matakata were praised by Kellum.
“The US remains dedicated to our partners and friends across Africa and will continue to work side-by-side with them.”
Matakata said the increasing global footprint of crime showed geographical boundaries were no longer serious restrictions when it came to the scale and impact of crime.
“Our law enforcement agencies cannot work in isolation. This summit was crucial to forge strong networks of collaboration, to pool and influence each other’s resources, cultivate meaningful expertise and create innovative regulating answers,” she said.
“This (summit) will help all to ensure rapid response in the detection, alleviating and investigation of any impending dangers or threats.”
Matakata said they should take advantage of the collaboration opportunities which presented themselves.
“The Hawks strongly supports the need for continuous innovation, and recognises the value of a multi-stakeholder approach to drive innovation,” she said.
Drugs worth R80k recovered, eight arrested in Phoenix KZN

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.