Proving that there is such a thing as arm candy when gracing any red carpet event, celebrity couples have taken it up a notch by pairing and matching their outfits to those of their better halves.
Whether local or international, “red carpet coupling” has fast become the trend when attending A-list events.
This follows the “Brangelina” fad which saw Hollywood movie star power couple Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie – who recently shook the world with the announcement of their divorce, leaving room for the newly engaged hip-hop trap artists Cardi B and Offset to pick up the reigns.
Cardi B, left, and sister Hennessy Carolina arrive for the 60th annual Grammy Awards. Picture: EPA
However, the ongoing struggle for the title of king and queen of the red carpet will always remain between 22-time Grammy award recipient Beyonce Knowles and her millionaire rapper husband Jay-Z, who leave no stone unturned when making an appearance, and “frenemies” Kim Kardashian and Kanye West, who continue to wear only the latest runway couture pieces.
Beyonce Knowles and husband Jay-Z arrive for the 2015 Anna Wintour Costume Centre Gala. Picture: EPA
Gone are the days when simply wearing a designer dress and suit could get you on the front page.
Couples are exploring funky and stylish ways as a pair by ensuring that the intricate details like shoes, colour and textures all tie in perfectly to the greater vision.
Kim Kardashian and Kanye West arrive for the 57th annual Grammy Awards. Picture: EPA
Design houses like Yves Saint Laurent, Balmain, Versace and Christian Dior are some who have capitalised on the “his and her” trend, which is evident in the last runway collections which border on the unisex, a-sexual design of clothing, fitting both men and women.
Headlining local newspapers and social media hashtags is a flirty SA couple who have dubbed themselves the “mom and dad” of the red carpet – Top Billing presenter and face of Ponds Ayanda Thabethe and Dreamteam hip-hop member and Mzansi Magic presenter Dash Mkhathini.
The two recently featured with an image posted on their social media platforms which was captioned “Mom and dad at the #SunMet”. The image made its rounds as fans sang praises for the couple without a single mention of their outfits.




 Mom & Dad at the #SUNMET #GHMUMM #DNA | : @ramiie_g
A post shared by  AYANDA THABETHE (@ayandathabethe_) on Jan 27, 2018 at 11:57am PST



Seven secrets to coupling
1. Find a partner who shares, compliments and understands your sense of style.
2. Decide on a look that will suit both you and the partner.
3. Keep communication lines open, chemistry is everything!
4. Practise the arrival photo pose until you can do it in your sleep.
5. Find a credible photographer who will ensure the image says all the right things.
6. Shine, independently as well as a pair.
7. Stay consistent and faithful to each other; if one isn’t available then neither can be present.
The hottest beauty looks from the ‘Black Panther’ red carpet

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.