Dar es Salaam. Soccer giants Simba and Young Africans say they have what it takes to cruise into the first round of the CAF club competitions. Simba assistant coach, Masoud Djuma said yesterday that there was no room for complacency despite launching their CAF Confederation Cup campaign with a 4-0 home win over Djibouti’s Gendarmerie FC last weekend. The Msimbazi Reds left for Djibouti yesterday for the preliminary round, return leg match of the continental championship. “Last weekend, we were up to the task. The players knew exactly what they wanted from the word go,” Djuma said a few minutes before their departure. “We’ll continue to work hard because our target is not only to eliminate the Djibouti team, but also emerge new CAF Confederation Cup champions,” he said. Gendarmerie must score five unanswered goals in the return leg match tomorrow to stage one of the greatest comebacks in the history of the CAF Cup if they are to sail through. A 27-member squad of Simba, who are competing in the African football for the first time in five years, left at the Julius Nyerere International Airport at 2:57pm. Simba captain John Bocco, who sustained a knee injury during their Mainland Premier League match against Mwadui FC in Shinyanga three days ago, said they will be all out for a win in Djibouti tomorrow. “We know that Gendarmerie will be at their home venue and before their supporters, but we are ready for the challenge,” said Bocco. Bocco scored the match-opener in their 2-2 draw with Mwadui. He is among players The Msimbazi Reds bank on for goals in the league and Confederation Cup. Meanwhile Yanga reportedly arrived in Seychelles safely yesterday ahead of Wednesday’s CAF Champions League match against St Louis. Having squeezed a 1- 0 home win in the preliminary round, first leg tie, Yanga need just a draw on Wednesday to book a place in the next stage of the tournament. In another development, star-studded Singida United were forced to a barren draw by Mbeya City in the Mainland Premier League match at the Sokoine Memorial Stadium in Mbeya yesterday. 