Trainer Dennis Drier and jockey Sean Veale could have a good day at Scottsville today and claim Race 1 with Dante’s Rock in a Maiden Plate over 1400m.
This three-year-old has been improving with each run and there was much to like about his last run when running on stoutly and finishing a promising third over 1200m at Scottsville. The gelding could exit the maiden ranks this time when stepping up the distance to 1400m and having a favourable inside draw.
Gareth van Zyl-trained Isca (Warren Kennedy) looks the one to beat in Race 2 and main event, a Pinnacle Stakes over 1000m. This consistent five-year-old, who is holding form well with Kennedy up, snatched victory five runs back in a MR 96 Handicap over the course and distance. The next time he stepped out at Scottsville was in his most recent outing when he put in his best work late again and finished a 1.25-length runner-up over 1000m.
However, the four-time winner can expect stiff rivalry from the likes of Hashtag Strat, Muscatt, Vision To Kill and Captain’s Girl
Drier-trained Breaking Barriers (Veale) has improved with every run at Greyville and her winning turn should come in Race 3, a Maiden Plate (F&M) over 1400m. This three-year-old was just caught near the line in her most recent outing when heavily backed, but any further progress should see her make it a winning debut at Scottsville.
Trainer Brett Crawford holds a trump card with three-time winner Sunset Eyes (Anthony Delpech) in Race 4, a MR 88 Handicap over 1200m. The combination will be bidding for a third consecutive win after scoring at Greyville over 1400m and then at Scottsville over 1200m. This four-year-old takes a step up in class but should be up to the task again.
The formidable combination of trainer Dean Kannemeyer and jockey Delpech should claim top honours with three-year-old Pearl Glow in Race 5, a MR 82 Handicap (F&M) over 1600m. The three-year-old struck top form in recent outings when sent off favourite and winning twice at Greyville with Delpech up. A claiming apprentice had the ride in the filly’s subsequent run when stepping up the distance to 1800m and finishing a one-length second. She is unlikely to miss this time with the champion jockey aboard and having the advantage of the best draw.
The Drier-Veale combination will justifiably fancy their chances of success with Delirious Nomad in Race 6, a MR 72 Handicap over 1600m. This three-time winner comes off two encouraging runs at Greyville where she ran on strongly to finish third over 1600m and 1400m. He could have the edge this time with the advantage of a good inside draw.
                                                         Would you like to place a bet on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.