What made you want to become a writer? The main reason was the passion of fulfilling God’s purpose in my life, as well as having a legacy that lasts over generations.  What are you currently working on? Currently I’m working on other two Books, the former will aid people, especially Tanzanians, on the field of Books’ reading and the latter is Exposure of University Life. Have you written any other books that are not published? Yes, I have already written several books that are not yet published. They’re mostly based on Spiritual Life Awareness and Financial Success.  What is your writing style? The writing style that I use is Narrative, Persuasive or Expository Style, basing on the kind of a book being written and its Audience. Sometimes, it’s a combination of all writing Styles.  What have you put most of your effort into regarding writing? My effort is much on spiritual life awareness and financial success, as my dedication to all Christians and other non-religious individuals that are Idle-Minded.  What is/are your book(s) about? The currently released book “sitarudi nyuma tena” is mostly about the life challenges that this generation faces, the steps needed to conquer the challenges, the steps one can follow to reach his God-given Destiny, as well as a letter to all Ladies that are in a desire of acquiring Un-destructive Spiritual and physical beauty, regardless of the current world system. It’s a wonderful book that no one is supposed to miss a copy of.  Does your book have a lesson? Moral? Of course, my book does have both a lesson and a Moral. Anyone who will get a copy of it and read will be a witness on this.  What is your favourite part of your book? A letter to all Ladies that are in a desire of acquiring Un-destructive Spiritual and Physical Beauty, regardless of the current world system. I’m passionate on seeing a God’s standard Ladies generation.  What is the toughest criticism given to you as an author? Criticisms are always there as long as we are surrounded by humans who are not God’s Angels. The toughest Criticism given to me as an Author is that Tanzanians won’t buy my books since they are not passionate on buying and reading books of the writing styles that I use.  What book that you have read has most influenced your life? The Bible. Just as Lamax quoted, “The Bible is my dictionary, whenever I study it; I get the definitions of my Life vocabularies.”  Who is your favorite author? I have a lot of authors that do inspire and motivate me, both within and outside Tanzanian boundaries. My favourite Author is Brian Tracy, one of America’s top business speakers, a best-selling author, and one of the leading consultants and trainers on personal and professional development in the world today. He tries so much to bring out the best in me.  Anything you would like to say to your readers and fans I do love all of my readers and fans, wishing them a prosperous life, and insisting on them having a lifelong support to me and to other Authors and Writers out there, as well as committing themselves on reading quality books.  Do you have any hidden or uncommon talents? Yes I do, I’m not the first man to express this, many times before Lamax has expressed this; “Everyone is given by God a unique solution to a problem that faces mank  What gives you inspiration for your book(s)? Inspiration for my books is given by the Lord Almighty who provided me a free gift and a purposeful life.