Ask any new mom – having a newborn is probably the most euphoric experience that you will ever go through. You will feel an overflow of love and happiness. You will exist in a little baby bubble, where all you do is marvel at the little hands and feet that you created.
Unfortunately, you will also walk around with one eye open, wondering whether the difference between night and day even matters anymore.
Motherhood doesn’t leave much time for relaxation or ‘me time’ – let alone a decent shower! Before you know it, you’re snapping at everyone from your husband, to the neighbour who toots his horn (how dare he?!) and the poor family dog who hasn’t got the memo that he’s not allowed to bark anymore.

But, you can’t pour from an empty cup. Which is why it’s so important to carve out even just 10 minutes for yourself, and ultimately those around you (read: hubby).
In order to take care of your baby, you need to take care of yourself. And, you don’t need to escape to the spa to do so (although, that will never hurt!).
Slow down and relax, even if it’s just for 10 minutes each day. It may seem impossible, but I promise you, just a few minutes spent on yourself each day will give you that extra ‘oomph’ to tackle the madness that is motherhood.
Not sure what to do? Here are 10 ideas:
1. Go for a quick drive
Picture: Thinkstock
Open the windows for some fresh air, put your favourite song on and crank the sound up! Music is good for the soul, and there’s something liberating about singing at the top of your lungs to your favourite song.
Even if you just go around the block, you will return home a more light-hearted version of yourself. And, you might just have a skip in your step!
2. Have a real meal
When was the last time you had both hands free to eat a meal? Or drink a cup of hot coffee? Probably before baby was born. Take 10 minutes to heat a meal and actually enjoy eating it. Or make a cup of coffee, and put your feet up and drink it.
Chew your food, enjoy the flavours and go for seconds if you want to …
A hearty meal or a good cuppa coffee can do wonders for a frazzled soul!
3. Video call your mom or your bestie

Being at home with your baby all day can get a little bit lonely. Thanks to technology though, you don’t need to physically leave the house to have a coffee date. A 10-minute video call is enough for a daily rant or catch up with your mom or best bud.
4. Shop!
10 minutes may not be enough time to hit the mall, but that doesn’t mean you can’t shop online. Spoil yourself with something you’ve been eyeing. You’ll feel good while shopping and when your order arrives in a few days time.
5. Go for a brisk walk
You needn’t go far – around the block will do. Getting your heart rate up is not only good for your health, but will rev up those feel-good endorphins.
Plus, a little fresh air is great for perspective, if a crying baby has sent you off the edge.
6. Get lost in a book
Picture: Thinkstock
I’m a firm believer that reading is the best form of escapism. Even if you only get through five pages in 10 minutes, your mind was 100% somewhere else for those five minutes.
If books are not your thing, catching up on your favourite glossy gossip mag will be just as relaxing.
7. Do your hair, or put on a smidge of make-up
You’ll be surprised at how good a little bit of self-care can make you feel.
It often feels pointless to ‘doll’ yourself up when all you’re going to do is change nappies all day. But, I promise you, a hair iron and a tube of mascara is often all that’s needed to lift your spirits and make you feel brand-new (and not like a zombie-mom who only slept for 90 minutes!).
8. Spend 10 guilt-free minutes on Pinterest
Photo: AFP
… or Facebook or Instagram.
OK, so I hardly ever follow through with my Pinterest pins, but I love dreaming up DIY projects. One day I’ll get to them, but for now, it’s exciting enough to find different trendy ideas and imagine how they would look in my house.
It’s just as fun (and relaxing) to catch up with Facebook friends and share baby pics for everyone to ‘oooh’ and ‘aaaah’ over on Instagram.
9. Turn to paper
If you’ve been feeling a little overwhelmed since bringing baby home, it’s nice to get your feelings in check by writing about them. Writing in a journal or diary is therapeutic and a great way to record those newborn (and new mom) memories.
10. Do nothing
When you’re a mom, doing nothing can feel like you’re doing something. If you can’t muster up the energy to do anything but stare at the ceiling and watch the world pass you by, then do that. A break is a break, regardless of what you do – and a chance to space out and just “be” might be just what you need!
Brought to you by All4Women
When a mom feels depressed, her baby’s cells might feel it too

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.