Dar es Salaam. Lipuli FC head coach Seleman Matola has predicted an upset of Young Africans when the two teams face off in the Mainland Premier League match at Samora Stadium in Iringa tomorrow. Yanga arrived in Iringa on Thursday  from Mbeya, where they labored to down minnows Ihefu FC 4-3 on penalties in the Azam Sports Federation match on Tuesday. Matola said yesterday that pressure will be on Yanga, who sit third in the league with 28 points from14 matches, 12 points ahead of seventh-placed Lipuli. “We might have a poor record against Yanga, but things do change. We have done our home-work thoroughly,” Matola told The Citizen by phone from Iringa. “In a tough game like this, you need to take your chances and that’s what we are going to do,” he said. Matola said the fact that a goal deep into injury time (by striker Obrey Chirwa) rescued Yanga from the jaws of defeat against Ihefu, a first division side, suggests they are vulnerable. Yanga are seven points adrift of their arch-rivals and leaders Simba, and two behind second-placed Azam FC. Other teams in the top five are Singida United and Mtibwa Sugar, who are fourth and fifth with 27 and 26 points respectively. Lipuli will be unfortunate not to have on board Ugandan defender Joseph Owino, who is still nursing a knee injury he sustained during one of the recent matches. Matola assured the Iringa-based team fans that Owino’s absence will not affect the team in the match billed to be a nail-biting encounter. He said they have other players who are equally good. ‘We know that they (Yanga) have many experienced players and that they are performing well in the league. “But we know how to contain them as those who saw us in our first round match (against Yanga) in Dar es Salaam can attest. “We will l have to perform at our absolute best to get a result against them, we believe we can do that,” the former Simba midfield maestro insisted. Yanga were forced to come from behind to hold Matola’s men to a 1-1 draw in the first round clash at the Uhuru Stadium last year. Yanga assistant coach, Shadrack Nsajigwa has expressed optimism that tomorrow’s showdown would produce positive result for the Jangwani Street giants.