Prescription drugs are meant to be used by a specific person after obtaining a legal prescription from a licensed medical practitioner but cases of self-prescription have continued to be reported. These drugs are controlled for the sole purpose of safeguarding the public and avoiding inappropriate use of the drug. They are prescribed strictly for treating certain conditions. Prescription drugs can be dangerous if not used based on the advice of a licensed medical doctor. Some of the common side effects of prescription drugs are memory loss, blackouts, behavioral problems, Urinary problems, Sleep apnea, weakened immune system, hallucinations, depression, constipation, suicidal thoughts, seizures, respiratory depression, liver and kidney damage, reduced sex drive, chest pain, coma and in certain cases even death. Prescription drugs are also known to cause addiction by altering a person’s brain chemistry. This occurs by increasing the levels of naturally found neurotransmitters such as dopamine to abnormally high amounts causing temporary euphoria and hallucinations. Some of the commonly misused prescription drugs are; stimulants (Adderall & Ritalin), Morphine, Codeine, Chlorpheniramine maleate (Piriton), Diazepam (Valium) and Alprazolam (Xanax). The effect of these drugs has such a big impact on the brain that people who’ve recovered from prescription drug abuse continue to have symptoms such as memory loss, anxiety suicidal thoughts, behavioral and emotional problems. One of the most common ways in which teenagers acquire and try prescription drugs is from their friends and medicine cabinets at home. Majority of teens use prescription drugs for recreational purposes although some resort to stimulants to stay awake studying for tests and exams. Although this might seem alright, the teens who are dependent on stimulants will suffer serious long term effects as mentioned above. It is important to note that there is a very strong correlation between drug addiction and crime. Many people who are addicted to prescription drugs commit criminal offences in order to fund their addiction. Crimes include theft, assault and many more. There are numerous ways in which the prescription drug abuse problem can be overcome. One of the most important methods of preventing further abuse of pain medication and other prescription medications alike is to educate the public on its harmful effects. Majority of the public especially teenagers and young adults are unaware of the harmful effects caused by prescription medications and hence end up experimenting due to peer pressure. The easy availability of prescription drugs in pharmacies also adds to the problem of prescription drug abuse. 