One shouldn’t be surprised that Reeza Hendricks announced himself on the international stage after the weekend’s first T20 between the Proteas and India at the Wanderers.
His stylish 70 off just 50 deliveries in a losing cause is merely the continuation of an excellent season in franchise cricket.
In fact, the 28-year-old Highveld Lions opener recently became the first player in domestic cricket history to score three centuries in all three formats (first class, 50-over and 20-over) in one campaign.
But the really important thing about his latest knock is that for the first time in his Proteas career, Hendricks showed a broader audience the type of freedom he can bat with.
The man from Kimberley had three scores of 40-plus in T20 internationals before his effort at the Wanderers but none of those scores had a strike rate over 120.
He even started a tad slowly at the weekend before picking up the pace rapidly.
“I think the wicket was pretty good. That said, the Indians bowled very well, so I started slowly and then had to get a move,” said Hendricks.
“Given that wickets were falling around me, I had to try and take my innings as deep as possible. I managed to do that to an extent but I’d have loved to get us through.”
Nonetheless, it was an encouraging performance, especially in light of South Africa’s depth being severely tested on this tour.
“I’m grateful for the opportunity, so I had to just go out there and express myself and try and contribute as well as I could,” said Hendricks.
“But it was a bittersweet day because we didn’t win.”
The former national Under-19 star can’t really pinpoint why he’s been in such cracking form this season.
“I don’t think I worked on anything much different to what I’ve been doing, trying to keep it as simple as possible, backing my game plans and backing my strengths, so I just went with that and fortunate it came off.”
With the future of the national team looking difficult after 2019’s World Cup – when many stars are expected to announce their retirement – men like Hendricks needs to stake their claim.
ALSO READ:
Proteas seniors are having a ‘dismal’ time against India

For more sport your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.