Johannesburg Water will be conducting maintenance and an upgrade of infrastructure in Jukskei Park and North Riding, which will result in taps running dry, Randburg Sun reports.
Over a number of days, many streets will be affected and residents are urged to make alternative plans until construction is complete.

READ MORE: Water interruptions scheduled for Ekurhuleni
Jukskei Park interruptions
The water utility will be connecting new water pipes to existing mains throughout the month of February.

Start date: 8 February
Time: 8am to 4pm
Streets affected: Topaas Avenue, Chrisoliet Street, Jaspis Avenue, Oniks Avenue, Juweel Street, Kwarts Ave and Platina Street.
Restoration is expected to occur between 4pm and 6pm.

Date: 13 February
Time: 8am until 4pm
Streets affected: Platina, Juweel and Kornalyn streets
Restoration is expected between 4pm and 6pm.
Date: 15 February
Time: 8am to 4pm
Streets affected: Mangaan and Kornalyn streets, Leslie Avenue, Galiniet, Juweel, Robyn and Karbeit streets.
Restoration is expected between 4pm and 6pm.
Date: 20 February
Time: 8am to 4pm
Streets affected: Robyn, Bioksiet, Willowwood, Mauderhurst, Sandhurst, Platina, Grafiet, Summerbrook and Robyn streets.
Restoration is expected between 4pm and 6pm.
Date: 22 February
Time: 8am to 4pm
Affected streets: Ladbrooke, Rondelles, Rondelles and Beton streets
Restoration is expected between 4pm and 6pm.
 


In North Riding residents will be without water on Valentine’s day.

North Riding interruptions
Date: 14 February
Time: 8am to 4pm
Suburbs affected: North Gate extensions 37 and 50, Kevin Ridge and Extension 3 and some parts of North Riding.
Restoration is expected to begin at 4pm.
All are reminded of the Level 1 water restrictions in place which prohibit watering of gardens between 6am and 6pm in summer months and the washing of paved areas and driveways using hose pipes.
Details: Call Center 011 688 1699.
Residents can also report burst pipes, leaking water meters and open hydrants by dialling 011 375 5555 or 011 688 1699.
Water interruptions scheduled for Ekurhuleni

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.