If there’s one lesson the Proteas learnt from Heinrich Klaasen’s whirlwind innings against India in the second T20 in Centurion on Wednesday, it’s that you can set him steep targets.
Following his match-winning 69 off just 30 balls, South Africa’s wicketkeeper-batsman revealed that it was actually a short talk in the middle of the pitch with skipper JP Duminy that inspired him.
And the message was so simple actually.
Here’s what he had to say about that moment as well as the rest of his knock.
On Duminy’s motivation…
JP was the key factor to my whole innings. About the first or second over I was at the crease, he told me that the over needed to go for 10 runs. He told me to play my natural game and take the bowlers on. When he gave me that target of 10 runs, it just took all the fear away. It’s also important to keep calm. There was a stage where I was swinging quite hard and realised it’s okay to take one and relax for a moment.
On his stunning assault on leg spinner Yuzvendra Chahal, who was hit for five sixes…
I faced quite a lot of leg spin at amateur level. When I started playing there were quite a few quality leg spinners in the system. I’ve face Shaun von Berg a lot at the Titans too. We always made a joke that I need to attack and ‘finish’ off the other leg spinners’ careers so that Shaun could move up in the pecking order! Jokes aside, tonight the strategy worked perfectly.
On how special the knock was…
This one definitely wins. This is my home ground. It’s something you dream about when you’re a young kid, to play on your home ground and win a game for your country. This was the cherry on top.
On challenging Quinton de Kock for a place…
He’s got nothing to worry about. He’s a world-class player and our changeroom is missing him. I’m just grateful my dream has been fulfilled. I’m at an important stage in my career and I’m happy I’ve thrown my name into the hat now too. If this is my last series, then so be it.
ALSO READ:
Sensational Klaasen powers Proteas to important win

For more sport your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.