The trial of a former presidential protection officer accused of murdering his wife and daughter will only proceed next week, when his brother will testify in his defence.
Judge Eben Jordaan yesterday postponed the trial of Benedict Peloeole, 49, until Monday.
Peloeole, who was in the protection unit at the Union Buildings in Pretoria, has pleaded not guilty to murdering his wife Jane, 42, and daughter Tsholofelo, 23, at their house in Westville, Pretoria West, on the night of September 12, 2015.
The state alleges the couple had an argument earlier in the day before Peloeole left for his cousin’s funeral.
On his return, he asked his wife to cook liver for him and then fetched his firearm from another room and allegedly shot her.
He then went into the lounge where he allegedly also shot his daughter.
They both died at the scene of gunshot wounds to their upper bodies. Peloeole’s nephew, Kgosietsile Peloeole, 21, earlier testified that his uncle had shot his wife and daughter for no apparent reason and without saying a word.
He described his uncle and aunt as a normal couple who had a good relationship with their daughter, a social worker.
He said they had always sorted out disagreements amicably.
Peloeole admitted that spent cartridges and bullets found at the scene had been fired from his service pistol, but said he had been given a tranquiliser that day and was not aware of the shootings.
He testified last year that he had started feeling strange and had passed out after having a beer.
When he woke up, two of his family members were holding him and they told him he had shot his wife and child.
Peloeole claimed he had been set up for the murders because his nephew was afraid he would find out about his (the nephew’s) relationship with his daughter and would kick him out of the house.
– ilse@citizen.co.za
Cop accused of killing wife and daughter says he was set up




For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter