Dar es Salaam. Mainland giants Young Africans gave their fans an ideal Valentine’s Day gift on Wednesday as they thrashed 10-man Majimaji 4-1 at the National Stadium. Papy Tshishimbi dazzled with two goals to steer Yanga to the victory they needed to cut Simba’s lead to four points in the Mainland Premier League. Yanga remain second in the top flight table with 37 points from 18 matches, four points adrift of leaders Simba, who take on Mwadui FC today at Kambarage Stadium in Shinyanga. Needing a win to barrow gap on the Msimbazi Reds and be in the perfect frame of mind ahead of next week’s clash against St Louis in Seychelles, Yanga had to wait until in the 20th minute to score their first goal through a penalty. Referee Nassoro Mwinchui from Coast Region.awarded Yanga the spot kick after defender Mpoki Mwakinyuke handled the ball in the penalty area in desperate efforts to clear a goal-bound shot by striker Obrey Chirwa. Tshishimbi made no mistake with it, sending goalkeeper Salehe Malande the wrong way. Majimaji were reduced to 10 players when the referee gave Mwakinyuke marching orders allegedly for insulting him (referee). Majimaji won the battle in the midfield in the first twenty minutes, but had trouble in breaking down the hosts’ defence, which was built around Andrew Vincent, Said Makapu and Hassan Kessy. In the 29th minute, Yanga doubled their lead through Chirwa off a Gadiel Michael cross. The hosts scored their third goal in 44th minute through Emmanuel Martine, whose sizzling shot gave the Songea team goalie no chance for a 3-0 half time lead. Majimaji were a more aggressive side in the second half. They narrowed the deficit in the 56th minute through a penalty by Marcel Boneventure. They were awarded the penalty after Juma Said handled the ball in the penalty box before Tshishimbi hit the final pin on the Majimaji’s coffin a few minutes later. Yanga are expected to leave for Seychelles on Sunday for the preliminary round, return leg match against St Louis on Wednesday. Line-ups: Yanga:- Ramadhan Kabwili, Hassan Kessy, Gadiel Michael, Said Juma Makapu, Andrew Vincent, Maka Edward, Emmanuel Martin, Papy Tshishimbi, Pius Buswita, Obrey Chirwa and Ibrahim Ajibu. Majimaji:- Salehe Malande, Aziz Sibo, Mpoki Mwakinyuke, Kenned Kipepe, Paul Maona, Hassan Hamisi, Peter Mapunda, Yakubu Kibiga, Six Mwasekaga, Marcel Bonaventure and Jafar Mohamed