Risky behaviours among young people could lead to psychological problems. The young generation could work on ways and means that positively build them to be psychologically healthy individuals. Much of the growth of children during all their times at school involve the developments of child’s mental health and behavioural growth towards their educational goals. The lessons and paths that children at schools do get through are rather for the healthy promotion in building student’s physical fitness for the sake of creating good grounds for student’s academic developments. Psychologically, people who are physically fit are also healthier. Such people are able to maintain their life’s progress. They are also able to do different activities within the society. In a large extent, such people are not much accessible to physical problems. Students who are used to physical exercises are more likely to create mental fitness and they are healthy and more strong compared to those who are not accessible to physical exercises. Thus; for the students in schools to build up their mental health relaxed, both educational experts and parents have in a large extent train students towards making physical exercises to regulate their state of minds. The developments of students educational progress to a large extent are associated with the extent of how student’s behavioural fitness and mental health fitness. The school’s environments and parental care should build them towards educational progress. There must be better ways that the whole society, especially parents and educational specialists ensure their students attend to physical body fitness to strengthen their psychological health. Helping students to grow both physically and mentally fit is not that much easy but both teachers and parents have to work hand in hand to help students become focused in their academic work. Becoming physically fit requires people to change their life’s styles. This applies to schools, where, shaping students physically and mentally help in improving students education. When it happens that students at school or at home have much ample time that allows them to engage in unhealthy activities, their academic performance drop. There must be better means that educational specialists ensure their students join regular exercises teams, perform daily school’s routine activities, inter-school subject clubs, and school jogging exercises. A good physical and psychological health would lead to educational progress. The physical and mental development of student’s is very important aspect in their wellbeing. The kinds of environment in which students are brought into, make them become aware of their surroundings and hence the need to explore. The school’s environment and student’s backgrounds play a vital part in building healthy psychology to students for their academic growth. School does not only shape psychological health of students but also provides enough ground for physical exercises aimed at strengthening their mental developments. Parents have their role in encouraging their children thereby develop their psychological stability. The relationships between parents and students in psychological heath building are important for the mental and emotional make up of the students. Much of the student’s growth happen at school; thus, parents need in to take responsibly of building healthy psychology of their children. Ensuring their children are obedient throughout their school’s life is a better tip towards creating their students healthier psychological growth. The author is a teacher