Morne Morkel, rather refreshingly, leaves the Proteas with a “happy heart”.
The lanky quick on Monday surprisingly announced his retirement from international cricket at the conclusion of the four-match Test series against Australia, which starts in Durban on Thursday.
But he certainly bore the tone of a man who’s very happy with his decision.
“Obviously, cricket is what I love,” said Morkel.
“I’ve played it all my life so it’s a very tough decision. It’s really special to play for the Proteas.”
Uncertainty about the 33-year-old’s future had been one of the recurring themes this season.
There were already rumours before Ottis Gibson started his tenure as South Africa’s new head coach that Morkel was considering moving on because of a lack of communication over where he fits into the plan for next year’s World Cup.
The two men eventually did have a sit-down, with Morkel committing himself.
However, the experienced quick – who has 294 Test wickets – seemed to tail off in terms of his form as the series against India progressed.
The emergence of Lungi Ngidi also played a role in him deciding to call it quits.
“The World Cup definitely played on my mind,” said Morkel.
“But I honestly think the crop of bowlers we have in the squad at the moment have great potential. If we give them a few months in this environment under Ottis, they’ll be more than capable of handling the responsibility and winning that trophy for us. I’ll just be a phone call away for the younger guys.”
Before the tributes and goodbyes start though, he has the opportunity to rectify one wrong in his career.
Morkel has been part of all three Proteas sides that have won three consecutive Test series in Australia but also hasn’t tasted a series win over them on home soil.
He aims to change that.
And one of the things he’s really looking forward to is his duel with David Warner.
“I’ve always enjoyed the battle against him. He’s a quality player and comes hard. That brings the best out of me because I know I have to be on the money right from the start,” said Morkel.
For more sport your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.