Shadow roots
Gone are the days where highlights appointments were booked like clockwork every six weeks, and applied as close to the roots as possible.
Thanks to techniques that evolved from ombre and balayage, this year’s blonde is much more low key. Shadow roots mostly leave the roots as is, with irregular highlights that melt together towards the ends.



A post shared by Salon Niccio (@salon_niccio) on Feb 25, 2018 at 11:38am PST



The good news? Maintenance is only required every 3-6 months. Your wallet will thank you!
Babe waves



A post shared by Shelene Shaer (@sheleneshaer) on Dec 17, 2017 at 12:23am PST



Barely there waves (or babe waves, as Shelene Shaer, co-owner of Tanaz hair salon calls them) are big news this year. Gone are the over the top Victoria’s Secret curls – simply grab a few strands and loosely curl them with a large styling wand or straightener. The aim is for it to look imperfect and slightly shaggy,  so don’t sweat the details.
The midi cut
Let’s not beat around the bush – the midi cut is an incarnation of the lob (AKA the long bob, which is now out by the way. It’s hard to keep up). This time round it’s around collarbone length, which gives you a lot of freedom with regards to styling, but still looks good with a quick blowdry.



A post shared by Jassa Hair Studio (@jassahairstudio) on Dec 7, 2017 at 10:15am PST



The structure of the cut is up to you and your stylist – it can be blunt and angled, or layered and feathered. Either would work, it all depends on your hair texture and lifestyle.
The blunt bob



A post shared by Busy Scissors (@samkanehair) on Feb 20, 2018 at 7:24am PST



After years (decades even) of refining the 90s bob to fit our requirements, it seems to be making a comeback in its original form. No more lobs and textured cuts – this year’s biggest fashion statement might just be a super short angular bob. If you’re brave enough to get one, you’ll be bang on trend.
Super sleek



A post shared by Shelene Shaer (@sheleneshaer) on Jan 29, 2018 at 11:44am PST



Now that the last of us have mastered cool and casual waves, the cool kids are no longer interested. The trend is now smooth and sleek shiny hair that looks healthy and cared for. Whether you achieve this by blow-drying or using a straightener is up to you.
Braids 2.0



A post shared by Smart Hair Extensions® Salon (@smarthairextensions) on Feb 25, 2018 at 11:52pm PST



Good news for summer – braids are a go. But no more intricate milkmaid and ridiculously complicated 12-step braids – it’s just straightforward plain or french braids now. As braids are now more functional than anything else, they don’t have to be perfect in the slightest.
A curtain fringe



A post shared by Bellezza Hair Boutique (@bellezza.hair.boutique) on Feb 18, 2018 at 11:14am PST



Yip, you read that right. What is it, you wonder? A slightly longer fringe that is parted down the middle. It’s a little less daunting as well as easier to grow out than a blunt fringe, and is reminiscent of 60s and 70s hairstyles. As with a blunt fringe, avoid this one if you have a very short or round face.
Brought to you by All4Women
5 celebrity-approved ways to wear your bun this season

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.