The walls are closing in on the man known as “Namba Wan“, Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma, Nxamalaa, Msholozi, yena wase DakwawuDunuse eNkandla. If opposition parties are successful, he will not deliver the 2018 State of the Nation address.
He is facing a toxic cocktail of traps. Just yesterday, he made submissions to the National Director of Public Prosecutions (NPDD) on why he should not face the music on those 783 racketeering, money-laundering and corruption charges.
If ANC’s national executive committee (NEC) “sources” quoted by media for the past four weeks are reliable, he is also facing a revolt within his own party at Luthuli House and in the provinces.
Should he, as comrades like saying, emerge from these hurdles unscathed, Nxamalala faces yet another acid test, as Parliament is currently fine-tuning an impeachment process. After the Constitution Court ruled that speaker Baleka Mbete is empowered in terms of the constitution, together with Parliament, to take action against a head of state who violates his oath of office. That “you failed to uphold, protect and respect” ruling is still alive.
On the bright side, the ANC may just close ranks and ensure that he remains as the country’s number-one citizen. After all, this is a party that refused EFF’s votes in Parliament to amend the constitution to give impetus to land redistribution. No doubt figuring out they could claw back support shed to the EFF, the party shockingly regurgitated EFF’s proposal during one of the commissions at the national elective conference it held in Nasrec.
In the event that Msholozi is recalled like Thabo Mbeki after Polokwane 2007 conference, let us ponder what funny bones might miss him for.
In this week’s edition of Throwback Thursday, we take a look at what you can do when an exotic number appears on your prepared speech. Well, if you are Jacob Zuma, you wing it. The jury is still out on whether the speechwriter sadistically used actual numerical figures instead of just spelling it out in words.

Expel ANC members who take party to court – Zuma