Johannesburg mayor Herman Mashaba has accused the African National Congress in the city of attempting to stop the insourcing of security personnel to protect “lucrative security contracts handed out to their tenderpreneurs”.
“It has become clear that the ANC in Johannesburg is trying to fight the city from insourcing thousands of security personnel. The latest effort now involves using journalists to sow blatant lies about the use of companies in the city to which they allege I have financial interests,” Mashaba said on Sunday.
“The latest in this ridiculous series is now allegations of Lephatsi Financial Services doing work for the City of Johannesburg around the insourcing of security personnel. While campaigning for mayor of the City of Johannesburg, I resigned from all directorships that I had held in my business career. I have declared all of my financial interests and engage with the Integrity Commissioner to ensure my declarations go beyond the requirements of me,” he said.
During the process leading to the insourcing of security personnel in the city, he engaged the services of a long-time business associate to assist in the financial modelling of the exercise. This was offered to the city free of charge and after having determined that this associate had no interests in the city.
“Arising from this critical work, we have been able to initiate the process to begin insourcing to the benefit and dignity of our security personnel. The fact that I am able to bring expertise from the private sector to assist the city without benefit to anyone other than our residents, is something of which I am not ashamed,” Mashaba said.
“I am informed that the ANC’s open opposition to the idea of insourcing stems from scores of lucrative security contracts handed out to their tenderpreneurs. Unfortunately the ANC is now resorting to peddling lies to undermine this process in their efforts to continue the oppression of security personnel in the city in favour of tenderpreneurs. The fact that the ANC has the temerity to talk about such matters while we are still cleaning up their rampant legacy of looting is beyond hypocracy,” he said.
The insourcing of security personnel would begin at the end of March. It was set to provide the men and women who perform this task in the city with a better take home package and benefits of dignified employment. “All of this will cost the residents of our city nothing more, because it will no longer operate under lucrative profit bearing tenders,” Mashaba said.
– African News Agency (ANA)
Family assaulted, woman stabbed on Noordhoek Beach