Gwede Mantashe – police
Although not yet an MP, former ANC secretary-general Mantashe is known for his no-nonsense approach to work. The rudderless South African Police Service and the Hawks need a leader of his calibre to give them a serious shake-up.
Pravin Gordhan – public enterprises
It is generally accepted that former finance minister Gordhan, who did a good job in that portfolio, should be appointed to public enterprises, to be a corruption watchdog in state-owned entities, including Eskom, Transnet and SAA.
Nhlanhla Nene – finance
As there is little doubt that Minister of Finance Gigaba will be axed, Ramaphosa would do South Africa a good service by returning the A-Team of Nhlanhla Nene and Mcebisi Jonas.
Mcebisi Jonas – deputy finance minister
Jonas can be trusted to fight corruption as he refused an alleged bribe of R600 million from the Gupta family to agree to be appointed as minister of finance and do their bidding.
Enoch Godongwana – trade, industry and economic development
Godongwana is a strategist with vast experience in finance and economics. The former trade unionist is among the longest-serving members of the ANC national executive committee and is the head of the ANC economic subcommittee. He would serve as usefully in any economic cluster department, but would be best in the trade and industry portfolio.
Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma – social development
Dlamini-Zuma has to go to social development, a department embroiled in controversy over the grants tender under incumbent Bathabile Dlamini. A turn-around specialist who introduced efficiency and a work ethic into home affairs, Dlamini-Zuma would be a massive improvement.
Lindiwe Sisulu – education and Angie Motshekga – human settlements
Sisulu was minister of housing from 2004 to 2009 and since 2014 has been minister of human settlements. She and Motshekga need to swap portfolios. It’s not about incompetency, merely a change of scene.
Mathole Motshekga – justice and correctional services
Motshekga, who was former ANC chief whip until he was sidelined by the Zuma camp, has been the chairperson of the portfolio committee on justice for a number of years. His work has gained him respect from government officials, civil society and the public at large.
Bheki Cele – state security and intelligence
As the intelligence community had been involved in a number of blunders under David Mahlobo, a new leader of the calibre of Cele deserves to be appointed to this post. Cele is well respected for his passion for crime-fighting and for this police intelligence needs to be jacked up.
Joe Phaahla – transport
With the crisis in the Passenger Rail Agency of SA and SAA, Phaahla, who has occupied many government political and administrative portfolios nationally and provincially, is an ideal candidate for minister.
General Siphiwe Nyanda – defence
Nyanda is a former SA National Defence Force chief respected by both the former statutory and nonstatutory members of all forces. The SANDF needs a leader with military experience.
Bantu Holomisa – deputy defence minister
Holomisa, who is willing to serve in government to promote democracy without compromising himself as an opposition leader, was deputy minister of tourism and environment in the Mandela government. Zuma appointed him to the Defence Force Remuneration Commission and asked for his help to negotiate an end to the SANDF members’ wage strike some years ago.
Jackson Mthembu – communications and postal service
He heads the party’s communications subcommittee and the portfolio committee on communications which did a great job during the SABC hearings in 2015. He is an advocate of media transformation and diversity.
Ayanda Dlodlo – home affairs
She was mistaken for a Jacob Zuma supporter, perhaps because of her association with the MKMVA and its chairperson, Kebby Maphatsoe. But Dlodlo, a former MK cadre, proved to be no puppet. She is a workaholic, who prefers to labour quietly far from public scrutiny.
Ronald Lamola – youth development
Lamola, a former ANC Youth League deputy president under Julius Malema, is one of the few who did not follow Malema to the EFF. Instead, he went home to participate in grassroots ANC structures in Mpumalanga.
Zizi Kodwa – sports and recreation
Kodwa is from the Fikile Mbalula ANCYL generation. He was a Zuma loyalist and presidential spokesperson. But towards the end of Zuma’s reign, he dumped him and sided with Ramaphosa.
Senzo Mchunu – minister in the presidency (planning and monitoring)
Mchunu was ousted as ANC KwaZulu-Natal leader and premier by the Zuma camp. He campaigned for Ramaphosa prior to the December elective conference and helped to partly tilt the scales in Ramaphosa’s favour in the province.
Baleka Mbete – international relations and cooperation
Mbete has been the speaker of the national assembly for several years. She previously served as the country’s deputy president and was ANC national chairperson until last December. As a former exile, she is knowledgeable about the international community.
Mondli Gungubele – local government and provincial affairs
Gungubele is a doyen of local government. He was MEC of the portfolio in Gauteng and served as executive mayor of Ekurhuleni Metro for years.
Blade Nzimande – labour
Nzimande was the main target of Zuma’s last Cabinet reshuffle. As labour minister, Nzimande would be closer to the working class.
#CabinetReshuffle: Will Zuma-Gupta linked ministers get axed?

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.