Democratic Alliance (DA) member of parliament Adrian Randall, together with concerned community members, were “pleasantly surprised” that complaints of ill treatment of hospice inmates made against Lodewyk P Spies Home in Eersterus could not be backed up.

Randall and concerned residents visited the home, east of Pretoria, on Wednesday
They were met at the home by clean floors and the aroma of food being cooked. The dining area was spick and span. Laid out tables, lily-white table clothes completed the setting.
“I’m pleasantly surprised to see the set-up …  it’s clean and neat,” remarked Randall.
The visit was prompted by a social media report of abuse of inmates and pictures showing an elderly man lying on the floor.
Abraham Damons, the manager at the home, said there was a deliberate attempt to destabilise the home. “The Facebook story by Mary Clarkeson is completely false, if she’s got evidence, let her give it to you,” Damons said.
Clarkeson posted a picture of the infirm man lying on the floor on her Facebook wall. The caption read: “This is the kind of abuse taking place at the home.”
However, Damons said the picture had been staged because the infirm inmate couldn’t get out of bed without help.
“Someone must have removed him from the bed and put him on the floor and took the picture. That very same person sent the picture to people outside this facility,” ventured the manager of the home.
When asked why the electricity was cut off for three days, Damons said the department of social department was to blame because it paid the home late. As a result the home couldn’t settle its bills on time.
He said even when the power was cut off, inmates were still given “the best care” and always had their meals.
“We have a gas stove for backup purposes, we will never allow the elderly to suffer.”
In the TV room, elderly people were sitting and watching news. The bedrooms were all tidy.
The man whose picture was circulated on social media, Lawrence Mdluli, 90, was in a wheelchair under the shade with his fellow inmates.
However, Randall said it was important for the DA to do the inspection and be sure elderly people were not being mistreated.
She said the plan is to also seek donations from the private sector.
“Whether its financial contribution, wheelchairs and machines, please come and assist, we need show our elderly people that we are not throwing them away and not forgetting about them,” Randall said.
– African News Agency (ANA)

For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter. For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.