An employee relations practitioner in the human resources department at the University of South Africa (Unisa) told the South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC ) that he experienced resistance when he attempted to conclude investigations into the directors accused of bullying and harassing subordinates.
Leslie Kgapola was today testifying at the hearing led by the SAHRC to investigate allegations of unfair discrimination, racism, sexism and harassment at the Unisa college of law.
He said two of the women who were suspended by the university, were later reinstated without going through disciplinary hearings.
He told the hearing that Unisa vice chancellor Prof Mandla Makhanya and vice principal of teaching, learning, community engagement and support, Prof Gugu Moche instructed him to halt investigations.
The director at the directorate of academic planning accreditation and registration, Alice Mkuzangwe, has been accused of unfair labour practice, bullying and victimising her staff, insubordination, duty negligence, fraud and corruption.
Academic information system manager, Bayanda Malgas has been accused of bullying and harassment and victimising her staff.
Kgapola explained that Mkuzangwe went to the CCMA and lodged a dispute of unfair labour practice.
“An agreement was reached with the university, that as part of the settlement she will withdraw her unfair labour practice dispute with the CCMA and the university will not proceed with the disciplinary hearing against her.”
Kgapola said he was then informed by Makhanya and Moche that an agreement with Mkuzangwe had been reached and he can stop the investigations.
He said he had prima-facie evidence against Mkuzangwe and was ready to proceed with disciplinary hearings.
He also said he received an email from the two professors to stop the investigations into Malgas. He said he wasn’t given an explanation as to why he should stop.
He explained to the commission that he was acting on instructions from above.
Last week, Makhanya said investigations into alleged harassment, victimisation and bullying against Mkuzangwe were at an advanced stage since they started in 2015. These investigations were prolonged by new developments which caused the university to also investigate the director for fraudulent conduct.
Makhanya said a disciplinary hearing was underway and all that was left was for Mkuzangwe to make her representations .
He said the university took the fraud allegations very seriously and made it clear that particular activities and engagements were currently in motion to ensure that the matter was pursued and not swept under the carpet.
– African News Agency (ANA)
Also read: Director bullied and treated us like maids – Unisa employee
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.