Energy Minister Jeff Radebe on Tuesday said the South African government has adopted the national development plan (NDP), as the country’s road map to deliver and transform the country’s economic landscape.
Radebe was welcoming delegates at the African Utility Week, which kicked off on Tuesday at the Cape Town Convention Centre.
“The NDP provides a shared long-term strategic framework within which more detailed planning takes place. The NDP envisages that South Africa will have an energy sector that promotes economic growth and development through adequate investment in energy infrastructure. Social equity through expanded access to energy at affordable tariffs and through targeted, sustainable subsidies for needy households and environmental sustainability through efforts to reduce pollution and mitigate the effects of climate change,” he said.
“Platforms like these are important as they continue to cultivate dialogue between government and all other stakeholders in the energy sector. African Utility Week  affords us an opportunity to reflect on a number of key issues and areas particularly as they relate to the delivery of energy solutions.”
According to Radebe, strategic integrated projects have been identified to support economic development and address service delivery. While these projects focus on broad-based infrastructure development in South Africa, they are linked to regional and the continental development as well.
He stated that South Africa’s energy plans were shaped by issues such as energy security, economic growth, environmental sustainability and energy access for all.
“While the NDP provides us the grand plan for the future, we need to keep the balancing act in respect of demand to secure energy supply especially as the country’s economy steadily takes an upward trajectory.”
Speaking of the integrated resource plan (the IRP) which is the electricity generation infrastructure plan for the country, in addition to Medupi, Kusile and Ingula, the IRP 2010 made provisions for other various generation sources such as renewables, coal amongst others, with a view to have all these energy sources contributing to the grid by 2030.
“As you would know by now, these allocations are currently under review as part of the IRP update process, which I have committed to finalising by mid-August 2018,” he said adding that: “in rolling out the IRP, the department launched a very successful Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer Procurement Programme (REIPPPP)”.
“To date, this programme has concluded 91 projects with a capacity of 6,300 MW. Of these, 62 projects with a combined capacity of 3,800 MW have already connected to the grid. This highly successful programme is applauded globally as the most effective and transparent public procurement initiatives by organisations such as the World Bank.”
About R136 billion has been invested in the South African economy, with another R58 billion to be invested over the next three to five years when construction of the 27 projects signed in May has commenced.
– African News Agency (ANA)