EFF leader Julius Malema told Coligny residents during the party’s visit today to celebrate its by-election victory that North West Premier Supra Mahumapelo would suffer the same fate as former state president Jacob Zuma, who was forced by the ANC to step down in February.
“Supra will go, just like Jacob Zuma. He has misused monies that were intended for the public health system in the North West and other public services,” Malema said.
Malema’s comments come after recent violent protests staged by residents of the province’s capital, Mahikeng, and surrounding areas, who were calling for Mahumapelo to vacate his position over allegations of corruption and inadequate service delivery.
The EFF leader questioned why the ANC in the North West legislature had not endorsed the EFF motion of no confidence in Mahumapelo to ensure that he is removed as premier.
“If this war was genuine, they would have agreed to use the motion of no confidence that the EFF had proposed,” Malema said.
The motion of no confidence in Mahumapelo had, however, been postponed when the red berets approached the court to compel the speaker of the North West, Susan Dantjie, to hold the no-confidence vote by secret ballot. A few days ahead of the vote, Dantjie had said that it would be by way of an open ballot.
Malema suggested the ANC had opted not to make use of the EFF motion of no confidence in Mahumapelo “because they wanted to kill our people”.
The protests in the North West had been characterised by violence, damage to property, blocked roads, torched vehicles and the looting of shops.
The EFF leader urged members, supporters and voters for his party to desist from taking part in such acts during protests, saying these are tendencies of the ANC, which is mired in factional fighting.
“No fighter should be involved in the looting of shops or burning of property because that is an ANC thing. I urge the fighters to not be a part of that vandalism because this is a war of factions in the ANC,” Malema said.
The EFF narrowly won the vote in Ward 15, Coligny, under the Ditsobotla local municipality, with 36.48% of the votes cast. The ruling African National Congress had previously won with 54.79% of the votes in 2016 municipal elections.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.