The South African National Civic Organisation (Sanco) has added its voice to those conveying condolences to the families of seven miners who died in a rockfall on Thursday caused by a seismic event at Sibanye-Stillwater’s Masakhane mine, Driefontein operations near Carletonville on the West Rand.
Sanco urged authorities “to impose hefty fines, including stiff punishment to mining companies for non-compliance with occupational health and safety standards,” Sanco spokesman Jabu Mahlangu said on Saturday.
“What is tragic about the incident is that it occurred two days after May 1, eclipsing celebrations of workers’ achievements and their struggles against exploitation and unfavourable working conditions,” he said.
Mahlangu wished the six injured miners recuperating in hospital a speedy recovery.
Earlier on Saturday, Sibanye-Stillwater said all 13 employees who were trapped underground after the seismic event had now been recovered by mine rescue personnel.
ALSO READ: Ramaphosa mourns mining disaster deaths at Sibanye-Stillwater’s Driefontein mine
“Regrettably, the last three employees who were recovered passed away from their injuries, bringing the total number of fatalities as a result of the seismic event to seven,” Sibanye-Stillwater said in a statement.
The six employees who were successfully rescued were in a stable condition in hospital. The families of the employees had been contacted and were receiving necessary support and counselling.
“The board and management of Sibanye-Stillwater wishes to express its sincere condolences to friends and family of the deceased employees and those impacted by this tragic event. A thorough investigation by management and the department of mineral resources (DMR) and other stakeholders will be performed and all efforts will be made to ensure to prevent incidents of this nature occurring in future.
“We thank everyone involved in the rescue operations, especially the mine rescue teams and our own employees, who have worked tirelessly for the last two-and-a-half days to rescue our colleagues under extremely challenging conditions,” Sibanye-Stillwater said.
– African News Agency (ANA)
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.