In our neck of the woods the folk have gone ga-ga over the royal wedding. One of the reasons could be the dorp has historic ties with Britain – despite it having been home to the infamous president PW Botha. 
Street names like York, Courtney, Merriman, Charles and Caledon – even a pharmacy called King George – bear witness. 
I’ve been told of a ladies craft group who got together on the great day and, while carrying on knitting for charity, watched the whole shebang on television. Oh, and they consumed cucumber sandwiches and bubbly during the “absolutely fab magic moment”. How British, I say, what? 
Knowing our women and their natural talent for multi-tasking, it’s an easy guess how the session proceeded with the background sound of clicking needles and very hoity-toity television anchors tracking the royal occasion. 
“I tell you, ladies, I’ll give my eye teeth just to have a glimpse of Harry in the flesh,” says Victoria (far-off relative of the portly queen?). 
Retorts Catherine (hopefully no connection to the beheaded one): “Excuse me, Vicci. With dentures you don’t have a snowball’s hope.” Titters all round. 
“What I like about Harry is his red hair and beard. I’d just love to pass my hand over it.” “Over what? His hair or beard?” asks Mary (of Scots descent). 
Says Elizabeth (so queenly): “I can’t wait to see what their children will look like. Will red dominate?” 
“Probably,” says Annetjie (no known Brit connection), “and they’ll probably be the largest family in royal history. Imagine all those rooinekke.” 
Shock greeted Annetjie’s remark. The clicking of needles suddenly stopped with only the sound of the clergyman raving about the need for love in the world. 
Claire (Latin for bright and clear) cleared the air. “Now, now, ladies. Babies are the last thing on Harry’s and Meghan’s minds.” 
“Dunno about that, Claire,” Annetjie hits back. “The way they look at each other and Harry wanting seven kids, they’d better start before the honeymoon.” 
Titters all round. 
On the other hand, the ladies may have just sat glued to the screen without saying a word. 
How would PW have responded to this Brit invasion? 
The finger?
Cliff Buchler.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.