Nomasonto ‘Mshoza’ Maswanganyi is hiding in fear following allegations of assault against her husband.
Mshoza, 35, is confirmed to have fled from her newlywed husband of six months, Thuthukani Mvula.
Speaking on SABC radio station Metro FM, Mshoza said she feared for her life, alleging her husband had sent hitmen to attack her in Phuthaditjhaba, Free State, last week.
This followed reports last week that Mvula kicked Mshoza out of their home in Bergville, KwaZulu-Natal, and burned her clothes in a fit of rage. Mvula, however, alleges to have found the Kwaito star wife cheating.
Mshoza said a case for assault had been opened at the Phuthaditjhaba police station after her husband allegedly assaulted her with a firearm.
She said police were looking for her husband, and that he was expected to be served and arrested on Monday.
The 35-year-old spoke of a dramatic relationship, where she was forced to tolerate her husband’s infidelity.
“I was planning to escape, but unfortunately he was quicker than me. I bought a house, and was planning on running for the past six months, but I didn’t know how to run,” Mshoza said, answering a question on how it had gotten to that point.
She said her husband looked innocent, but was a dangerous man, and alleged he would not hesitate “killing someone”.
“This guy is still dangerous, as innocent as he looks. He is dangerous,” adding she no longer felt safe.
She said they both cheated, and it was when her husband realised she also had found comfort in the arms of another man that he turned violent.
The Kwaito hit maker gave details of receiving messages from his husband’s mistresses.
“I even got angry because some girls would send me videos of them making love to him.”
“He did not deny it,” she said he would even cheat with her friends. When she attempted to leave, he allegedly said: “You know where your grave is.”
In the recent fallout that led to Mshoza going into hiding, Mvula allegedly sent out hitmen in three vehicles. She said he assaulted her with a gun and took her phone, car and weave to show her he was leaving her with nothing.
According to The Sowetan, Mvula has denied the allegations. He said he went to Phuthaditjhaba to fetch his car and found her with another man.
The tabloid said Mvula accused Mshoza of plotting with her ‘police’ boyfriend. Mvula also dismissed the claims he assaulted his wife with a firearm.
“If I had a gun, I would have killed her on that day when I found her. I just went there and took her out of my car. I don’t know if that is intimidation, because this is my car.”
Mvula said police had contacted him, and that he would hand himself in on Monday.
Phuthaditjhaba police spokesperson Mmako Mophiring confirmed that Mshoza had opened a case of assault, intimidation and pointing a firearm, according to the tabloid.