The Muslim Judicial Council (SA) has vehemently condemned the attack, saying it reiterates and emphasizes the core Islamic teaching and principle of “respect for all human beings”.
Meanwhile, Paul Herbst from IPSS medical has confirmed that the imam, one of three people who were seriously wounded in the attack, has succumbed to his injuries. The two others remain in a critical condition.
“The imam, who had his throat slit, has passed away due to his injuries,” Herbst said.
The attack came a day before the start of the holy month of Ramadaan.
The Muslim Judicial Council (MJC) said it reminds South Africans that the makeup of our society is one of religious, cultural and ethnic diversity and tolerance. “We should make every effort humanly possible to preserve our uniqueness and diversity in all its forms.”
The MJC called on all communities “to remain law-abiding citizens and refrain from any and all forms of vigilantism”.
It also called on SAPS and all other relevant government structures to bring the perpetrators and criminals to book, to face the full might of the law.
Durban Metro Police spokesperson Paboo Sewpersad confirmed the attack, adding that officers were “searching for the suspects”.
The fire brigade busy extinguishing a fire set in one of the rooms of the mosque, 10 May 2018. Pictures supplied by Rescue Care.
Local security company Reaction Unit’s Prem Balram said that upon arrival they found that “two victims with throats slit and were bleeding profusely”.
Police were not immediately available to confirm.
Reaction Unit also runs a private paramedic service.
“Paramedics were called to the scene to attend to the critically injured men. Our officers then noticed smoke emanating from the mosque and attempted to douse the flames. A third victim was found inside the building bleeding from a wound to his throat,” said Balram.
Members of the Muslim community outside the mosque, 10 May 2018. Pictures supplied by Rescue Care.
Balram said the suspects who were wearing balaclavas fled in a “white Hyundai light motor vehicle with no registration plates”.
 
– African News Agency and agencies
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.