A group of supporters of embattled North West premier Supra Mahumapelo have attempted to storm the provincial executive committee (PEC) meeting convened today to decide on whether he should step down as the premier.
Mahumapelo reportedly addressed the supporters outside the meeting venue where he told the group that he was chairing the meeting and that the PEC would report to party members once the meeting had concluded.
Mahumapelo, the ANC provincial chairperson, said earlier today he would not step down as the premier until the party’s PEC had made a decision on the matter.
North West ANC communication liaison Morweng Wessels told the SABC this morning: “The premier has reiterated, he said it clearly, loudly, to say he is going to meet with the provincial executive committee. You must remember the ANC is the centre, even the premier is the deployee of the African National Congress, so therefore, he must come to the PEC, tell the PEC what exactly is happening because the decision for him to resign, the PEC does not understand it. The PEC needs to be told, needs to be taken through processes so as to understand what is really the fundamental issue that compels the premier to resign.”
Wessels added that the PEC supported Mahumapelo for various reasons including the fact that he had championed radical economic transformation within the province.
“So we don’t see any reason for him to resign. So, therefore, we are going to meet from 9 o’clock, the PEC is going to meet, is going to outline all the issues, we are going to understand really what is the fundamental issue why the premier is resigning; after then it will be the decision of the structure,” Wessels said.
He described Mahumapelo as a radical and progressive leader the PEC still has confidence in.
“Those allegations levelled against him must be dismissed because none of them has been proved in a court of law. Why can’t people exercise patience and wait for a court of law to come with the outcome whether he is guilty of corruption or not? That is the stance of the provincial executive committee,” Wessels said.
The premier’s supporters in North West have reportedly coined a rallying slogan, “No Supra, no election”, calling for the premier not to be ousted.
Mahumapelo’s office announced earlier today that a media briefing where he was due to confirm his resignation today had been postponed indefinitely.
He told the SABC on Tuesday night that by midday on Wednesday, he would be the former premier of North West.
Earlier on the same day, he told the North West provincial legislature during his office budget vote that he would write a letter to the speaker before Friday.
Although he did not say what the contents would be, it was widely anticipated that he would finally throw in the towel after weeks of pressure. Communities in Mahikeng have been involved in violent protests to demand Mahumapelo’s exit.
Angry residents accuse the premier of corruption, which they say has resulted in the poor state of the province. In many places, there is an evident lack of basic services such as water and sanitation. Protesters have also bemoaned the province’s inability to create jobs.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.