Former president Jacob Zuma caused a stir in the KwaZulu-Natal legislature on Tuesday when he made an unannounced visit during the sitting.
The former president arrived as agriculture MEC Themba Mthembu was presenting his department’s budget.
Democratic Alliance (DA) leader in the legislature Francois Rodgers interrupted Mthembu, saying they could not continue and be part of the sitting with Zuma in the vicinity.
“The fact of the matter is that the economic woes of this country can be traced to one particular individual and we cannot be party to this,” said Rodgers before leading a walkout.
Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) MPLs said Zuma was not supposed to be party to the sitting as they had not been told of his arrival.
“We will never elevate Zuma to eminent person status when he has been rejected by parliament. He should not come here and expect some higher-than-expected treatment. Never,” said the EFF’s Vusi Khoza during a confrontation with acting speaker Yusuf Bhamjee.
Provincial Premier Willies Mchunu told the sitting that Zuma should be allowed as he was not interfering with the sitting but was there as the speaker’s guest.
“The rules are clear and the former president is not seated in the house but is merely at the guest’s chair,” Mchunu insisted.
Bhamjee cautioned EFF MPLs before ruling that they should leave the house owing to rowdy behaviour, but they refused, prompting a hasty discussion between ANC whips and the EFF. While uniformed police officers were spotted in the legislature corridors during the arguments, they did not enter the chamber to remove EFF MPLs, as some had anticipated.
ANC whip Mdumiseni Ntuli admitted that the ruling party was at fault for not informing opposition parties about Zuma’s arrival.
“We acknowledge that in line with the rules and conventions of the house, opposition parties should have been notified on time about the arrival of the eminent member in the house,” said Ntuli.
Khoza said they would continue to express their disapproval of Zuma’s visit in the legislature in future.
The former president’s visit in Pietermaritzburg comes a day after ANC and state president Cyril Ramaphosa visited the area following the killing of ANC activist Msawenkosi Mchunu, who was gunned down at his home on Friday evening.
– African News Agency (ANA)