Deputy President David Mabuza on Saturday called on the youth to cultivate a love for their people, starting by honouring their parents, the sick and the elderly.
Mabuza was speaking during the special provincial official funeral of legendary photographer Sam Nzima in Lilydale village in Bushbuckridge in Mpumalanga.
“We must tell our young people that if Sam Nzima could hasten our march to freedom, so they too can do more with all the opportunities of modern digital technology and social media,” Mabuza
“We must tell them that to be truly great and to move mountains, they must cultivate love for their people. And they can start by honouring their parents, mothers, the sick and the elderly.
“We must be able to say although the perceptive eye and compassionate lens of the legendary Sam Nzima have gone to rest, we will be able to look our children in the eye and say we are a nation fully in tune with their fears and hopes,” Mabuza said.
Nzima died on May 12 at Rob Ferreira Hospital in Mbombela (Nelspruit) after a short illness. He was 83.
Police officers, government official, and members of the public at the funeral of Nima in Mpumalanga. Photo: Balise Mabona
Nzima was buried on his farm 400 metres away from his house in Lilydale Village, Mpumalanga. Photo: Balise Mabona
Nzima’s eldest son Thulani Nima (seated third from left) and other members of his family (all seated) pray during the funeral in Mpumalanga. Photo: Balise Mabona
Nzima is best known for capturing the famous picture of Mbuyisa Makhubu carrying Hector Pieterson, after the latter was shot during the 1976 Soweto uprisings.
Mabuza praised Nzima for his contribution to the struggle and the role he played in the Mpumalanga provincial government.
“In 1995 he [Nzima] was appointed as a member of the first Mpumalanga tender board. Together with a number of prominent people of this province, he played a critical role in the establishment of effective governance and oversight structures during the early days of this democratic dispensation,” Mabuza said.
A school would be built in Bushbuckridge and be named after Nzima, who was buried on his farm about 400 metres from his house.
– African News Agency (ANA)