The woman who laid charges of assault, crimen injuria and intimidation against ANC MP Mduduzi Manana was allegedly offered R100 000 and another job if she withdrew the charges against Manana, TimesLive reports.
Christine Wiro, who had worked three weeks as a domestic for Manana, withdrew the case against the ANC MP on Monday.
The Zimbabwean had opened the case against Manana on Sunday at Douglasdale Police Station.
TimesLive reports the ANC MP, who was being accompanied by a woman who identified herself as Manana’s sibling, spent more than an hour negotiating with Wiro.
Wiro’s son, who was with her at the police station, told the publication his mother was offered the money and a job if she dropped the case against Manana.
It is further reported the publication’s journalist unwittingly witnessed the negotiations while at the police station to interview Wiro.
The woman accompanying Manana was quoted as allegedly saying a court case would not give Wiro money; money was allegedly also offered to the journalist, Wiro’s son, and her friend.
“We will give her money. We will give all of you here money‚ individually. Please consider our request.
“My brother is a politician, and he does not need this. We are black people‚ we can’t be doing this to each other‚” Manana’s female companion allegedly said.
Wiro’s son reportedly said: “They are offering us money. They are saying it would hurt his reputation if we go ahead with the case.



“He first offered my mother a job. She rejected it. He then offered a job for her where she would work for a friend that she rejected too. He then offered us R100 000.”



The Sowetan reported that Manana allegedly tried to push his domestic worker down the stairs yesterday at his double-storey home in Fourways, Johannesburg, leading to her opening the case against him.
The woman claimed he had abused her verbally repeatedly “for the slightest mistake”, and even threatened to have her deported back to Zimbabwe after she allegedly opened his gate for the wrong person, assuming it was an invited guest.
ALSO READ: The DA wants Manana removed in light of fresh allegations of woman abuse
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.