Bianca Fourie, the daughter of Krugersdorp Freedom Front Plus councillor Amanda de Lange, was allegedly left traumatised and hurt after she was apparently assaulted by a man at a popular local restaurant, Krugersdorp News reports.
De Lange reportedly attributed the altercation to an argument about a parking spot in Ruimsig on 26 April.
READ MORE: Pregnant woman collapses outside Zandspruit clinic after being turned away
De Lange told Roodepoort Northsider, who originally reported on the story, that her eight-months pregnant daughter, Bianca, was assaulted by the man inside and outside the Steers restaurant in Featherbrook Village on Peter Road. Summarising the incident, De Lange said the man became angry because he was pointed at by her daughter.
The man is said to be a prominent businessman whose name is known to the newspaper.
When Fourie arrived at the shopping centre, she allegedly found a parking space being vacated by another vehicle. She stopped to wait for the vehicle to leave, so that she could use the space. While she was waiting, a man in another vehicle allegedly motioned to her to give way, so that he could pass. She then pointed out that she was waiting for the car in the spot to leave.
When she entered the restaurant, she saw the man standing at the counter and asked him if he had a problem. He turned to her, and a scuffle, during which she sustained injuries to her face, upper arms and stomach, ensued.
Video of the assault was taken by the victim at the scene.

De Lange said Fourie was currently recovering at home and indicated that the unborn baby was fine. She confirmed that a case had been opened at the Krugersdorp Police Station, and that it would be transferred to the Honeydew Police Station for further investigation. Neither station has confirmed investigation into the matter.
In an online report, the man is said to have opened a case of crimen injuria against Fourie. It is reported that he also filed a claim against her in the Equality Court for the use of racist language.

The Roodepoort Northsider has been unable to make contact with the man concerned to get his side of the story, and Steers is yet to release a statement on the matter.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.