About 600 members of Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) party dressed in red T-shirts today converged outside the Industrial Development Corporation (IDC) head office in Sandton, where they demanded that business rescue practitioners at Shiva Uranium Mine urgently find new investors.
The IDC last month launched a court bid asking the Pretoria High Court to remove Louis Klopper and Kurt Knoop as rescue practitioners of the underperforming Shiva Uranium.
Klopper previously said the IDC was blocking a deal with local mining company BEK Holdings that would result in it managing Shiva for an interim period until the company can be sold.
The EFF, whose members and mine workers travelled in six buses from Mpumalanga, said delays in resolving the situation at Shiva were undermining the rights of workers to earn a living. Some mine workers are owed wages dating back to October last year.
Mpumalanga EFF provincial chairperson Collen Sedibe said: “We are here to support the workers of Shiva uranium mine, which was previously owned by the Guptas and we all know they are under business rescue practitioners”.
Sedibe added: “The IDC is the one which funded the Guptas and now with their lawyers have stalled or stopped some payments and the process of the buying of the mine by new investors. We are here to submit a memorandum that they must allow the business practitioners to do their work and find new investors.”
Bassy Makwane IDC’s corporate secretary together with Zama Luthuli, the executive for, marketing and corporate affairs, and the head of corporate risk, Phakamile Mainganya, received the memorandum of demands from the EFF.
Makwane promised to meet with EFF national chair, Dali Mpofu, and Sedibe next week to respond to the matters raised in the memorandum
Speaking in front of the workers and EFF members, Sedibe said: “All these workers work in very bad conditions, they are underpaid. Today they are here to support workers from Shiva but we will be going to all the mines with problems in Mpumalanga”.
The group included mine workers from Shiva Mine, Berge Mine Witbank, Just Coal Bankfontein Middleburg, Optimum Coal and Kusile power station.
On Tuesday, EFF supporters and disgruntled workers marched to the office of billionaire businessman Ramesh Joe Singh in Middleburg, where they demanded that he immediately pays outstanding wages to his workers at his Just Coal’s Bankfontein Mine.
The EFF has also said it would march to Mines Minister Gwede Mantashe’s office in Pretoria to demand better working conditions at mines.
– African News Agency (ANA)
Also read: ‘Wanted’ Guptas leave their mines and workers with nothing – report
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.