A sexually transmitted infection (STI) is thought to have led to the murder of a woman, allegedly by her lover, in Setswetla informal settlement in Alexandra on 28 April, Alex News reports.
The case was heard by magistrate Renier Boshoff, assisted by state prosecutor Lufuno Maphiri at Alex Magistrate’s Court on 2 May. The case was postponed for further investigation.
READ MORE: Sandile Mantsoe found guilty of murdering Karabo Mokoena
The 35-year-old suspect was said to have been drinking alcohol with a friend, who is the lover of the victim’s sister, when the deceased joined them, smelling of alcohol. This annoyed the suspect, who apparently urged her to stop her excessive drinking.
The suspect is said to have then blamed her for the STI he claimed to have contracted from her, as she was his only lover. She is said to have responded that her ‘punani’ was part of her body, and she had every right to do whatever she wanted with any part of it.
This  resulted in an alleged quarrel before the woman left, saying she was going to his room to cook for him.
The suspect later followed and allegedly found her still drinking and staggering while cooking. He is said to have further complained about her drinking, and they quarrelled again. The friend who lives next door allegedly heard a noise and went to check, but the suspect didn’t open the door when he knocked.
He claimed he later heard them pushing each other around, with the woman allegedly screaming. He contacted Alex Police Station, which dispatched officers, but the suspect refused to open for them, and soon after, the noise ceased. The friend and the police left.
In the morning, the suspect called and told the friend that the woman wouldn’t wake up. The friend went to the room and found her with blood on her face from a gash on the eyebrow.
The police were called, and the suspect allegedly claimed that he had hit her once across the face, and she fell against a broken window.
He said they had resolved their differences and went to bed. He further claimed that she had woken up at 2.30am complaining of a headache, but went back to sleep after taking painkillers.
He was then arrested.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.