Gauteng Health MEC Gwen Ramokgopa spent Workers’ Day yesterday serving people at Stanza Bopape Clinic in Mamelodi. 
The healthcare facility receives close to 5 000 patients per day, since Phahameng clinic closed for renovations in February. 
Ramokgopa said she had received complaints from the ward councillor about the frustratingly long queues at the clinic. 
“There has been tension between clients and staff because of the long queues. We know the staff is providing services under conditions which are not ideal. 
“The best way to celebrate Workers’ Day is to come and work alongside the staff and experience what they experience on a daily basis.” 
Ramokgopa attended to a crying baby and two adult patients, while interacting with staff to identify day-to-day problems. 
She said government would improve the electronic patient management system as the clinic had a disorganised filing system. 
“The first thing we will do is to prioritise the filing system. Secondly, we noticed there is also equipment that needs replacing. In the maternity ward, the issue is linen. 
“We need to make sure patients don’t bring their own blankets to the clinic as we are worried they will take diseases back home. Shortage of staff is also coming up,” she said. 
Last month, nursing staff at the clinic went on a go-slow strike after a drunk man allegedly assaulted a clerk when he brought in a patient at night. A police case was opened and the clerk was offered counselling. 
Ramokgopa was pleased that security at the clinic had improved since the incident, saying: “I see they have also put up burglar bars too. 
“We should work towards reducing diseases in this country, and it is possible. 
“Other cities in the world have the target of reducing diseases, while some have even closed hospitals because they are healthier.” 
The staff were motivated by Ramokgopa’s visit as she showed “excellent” medical skills, said clinic manager Sammy Otsheleng. 
“We feel motivated as staff members by her presence. When we see the executives coming to this facility, we feel we are doing something good for the community.”
Also read:  Gauteng Health starts paying doctors’ overtime
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.