Meghan Markle’s half-brother Thomas has written an open letter to Prince Harry urging him to call off his wedding on May 19, saying the marriage would “the biggest mistake in royal wedding history.”
But Thomas told Harry in the letter published this week in In Touch magazine it was not too late to call it off.
Her 51-year-old half-brother now living in Oregon describes Meghan in the letter as a “jaded, shallow, conceited … below C average Hollywood actress attempting to act the part of a princess”.
Thomas Markle Jr
“It’s very apparent her tiny bit of Hollywood has gone to her head,” the letter says.
“What  kind of person starts out using her own father until he’s bankrupt, then forgets about him in Mexico leaving him broke, over mostly her debts.”
Thomas says “you would think that a royal wedding would bring a torn family closer together, but I guess we’re all distant family to Meghan”.
“Not to mention, to top it all off, she doesn’t invite her own family and instead invites complete strangers to the wedding. Who does that?” he asks Harry.
Britain’s Prince Harry and his fiancee Meghan Markle will tie the knot on May 19
He urges the prince and the royal family “to put an end to this fake fairy tale wedding before it’s too late.”
In an interview with the Daily Mirror he added: “She is giving the greatest performance of her life. She is acting phony. I’ve read that Meghan wants to be like Diana.
“Diana was worshipped by everyone in the world. She was loved for the right reasons.
“That’s what Meghan wants, but I don’t think it is going to happen. She is not genuine like Diana.”
Meghan Markle is preparing to marry Prince Harry on May 19
Meghan last saw her brother at their grandmother’s funeral in 2011 but he says in his letter Meghan “is still my sister. She is family. So whatever happens is up to her, whether she wants to forget knowing me or the rest of her family, family comes first.”
Thomas’s description of Meghan in the letter differs markedly from how he summed her up to the Daily Mail shortly after the engagement.  The bride-to-be “has always been a princess”, he said then.
“I do have a sense of pride in Meghan being successful.  It was just obvious from day one that she was destined to be somewhere really big.
“She’s always been a princess.  She’s carried herself on that level since day one.”
Meghan’s half-sister Samantha was not as positive about the engagement: “The Royal Family would be appalled by what Meghan’s done to her her own family, ” she told the Daily Express at the time.
She has also accused Meghan of not doing enough to help her father but denies her upcoming book The Diary of Princess Pushy will be negative.
Samantha last saw Megan in 2008 and was also not invited to her sister’s big day.
But Meghan’s father Thomas Sr will walk her down the aisle at Windsor Castle in two weeks’ time, despite Thomas Jr’s claim that he hadn’t been invited, and her mother, to whom she is close, will also be attending.