Eric Naki
Sidelined but still-in-control North West Premier Supra Mahumapelo has declared war on his enemies, removing all his opponents in the provincial legislature in a move seen as also undermining President Cyril Ramaphosa and the entire ANC top brass.
Mahumapelo, who was put on special leave by his sycophantic provincial executive committee (PEC), ousted all members of the provincial legislature sympathetic to Ramaphosa.
They have been replaced with Mahumapelo’s lackeys with immediate effect.
They were mostly former MECs he had previously fired from his cabinet. The list includes Raymond Elisha, Wendy Matsemela, Saliva Molapisi, Mohlakeng Mohlakeng, Motlalepule Rantsho, Boitumelo Moiloa, Madoda Sambatha and Duma Ndleleni.
It’s believed they were being punished as all have publicly opposed the premier’s leadership style and the ongoing corruption in his administration.
Sambatha, who is SACP provincial secretary, and Elisha, who is ANC chief whip and former public works, transport and roads MEC, were leading calls for Mahumapelo to step down. Matsemela, former education MEC, is allegedly hated by the premier after she publicly accused him of having knowledge about the murders of corruption whistle-blowers such as ANC Rustenburg councillor Moss Phakoe and businessman Wandile Bozwana.
Molapisi, then safety and security MEC, was fired for allegedly knowing too much about corruption involving top politicians in the province. Ndleleni, a former sports and culture MEC, was allegedly a target for his role in the anti-Mahumapelo campaign while the others laid corruption charges against the head of the provincial health department, Dr Thabo Lekalakala, who they wanted removed from the department.
The PEC formulated what it called a “revised list” of candidates to replace the seven. It comprises OJ Tselapedi, Abram Mudau, Mantwa Kasale, Rebecca Seema, Gerald Modise, Solly Malete and Mike Khauoe. It was gazetted yesterday after being submitted to the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC). In a letter to the IEC provincial electoral officer, Dr Tumelontle Thiba, acting ANC provincial secretary Susan Dantjie, who is also the provincial legislature speaker, instructed the IEC that the revised list “should be recorded as such and processed accordingly”.
Although Mahumapelo was placed on special leave by the PEC this week, he remained the ANC provincial chairperson, a position that makes him the boss of all ANC deployees in the provincial government, including the premier and the executive.
He caused an uproar this week when he unconstitutionally appointed finance MEC Wendy Nelson as acting premier. The EFF vowed to challenge the appointment in court.
There are still questions about Mahumapelo’s unprecedented leave of absence.
The EFF said he was expected to resign instead of taking leave.
Similarly, recently former Mpumalanga premier David Mabuza appointed Refilwe Mtshweni as acting premier after he was elected as ANC deputy president, a move that was challenged by the provincial DA.
Mahumapelo’s latest action is seen as desperate move to completely remove his opponents from the political scene. He was allegedly not satisfied with just clearing them out of his cabinet, but wanted to ensure that they were expunged from the legislature completely.
“Supra wants to remove them, he is trying, but it’s not going to fly. We will oppose him. We will fight this man,” said an ANC member.
Yesterday people demonstrated outside the Madibeng District Municipality offices in Brits to express their support for Mahumapelo and district mayor Jostina Mothibe. Their placards read “hands off Supra” and “hands off Mothibe”. This followed protests and calls for action against rampant corruption in the municipality, including the purchase of expensive vehicles for senior officials.
– ericn@citizen.co.za