Patricia De Lille is doing her best to disprove recent statements from the Democratic Alliance (DA), saying she will only function in a ‘ceremonial’ role since her return as Cape Town’s mayor.
In a series of tweets from their official Twitter account last week, the DA reacted to the court’s ruling that De Lille must be reinstated as Cape Town mayor pending the outcome of her court application to review the party’s decision to terminate her membership. They claimed that she “will now act in only a ceremonial role”.

Patricia De Lille will now act in only a ceremonial role, with substantive governance decisions to be taken by the DA caucus in the interests of the people of CPT (while #deLille enjoys benefits of a Mayoral Salary at rate-payer expense).
— Democratic Alliance (@Our_DA) May 15, 2018

This week De Lille appeared hellbent on proving the party that attempted to remove her wrong by spearheading several projects, including putting forward a proposal that would see the city’s first low-income housing project in the city centre since democracy be built in Cape Town’s tallest skyscraper, as The Citizen reported yesterday.
Today De Lille donned a hard hat and took to Morkel’s Cottage, where she got her hands dirty assisting in the construction of 547 semi-detached houses. She did not miss the opportunity to tweet about her work.

I’m on a site visit to Morkel’s Cottage where the @CityofCT is building 547 semi-detached, detached single-storey houses and serviced sites. I also had a very insightful discussion with residents and beneficiaries to iron out project details. pic.twitter.com/leEXK73iiu
— Patricia de Lille (@PatriciaDeLille) May 22, 2018

Three informal settlements will benefit from the project, according to De Lille.

The beneficiaries for the project are residents from three informal settlements including Morkel’s Cottage, Beverley Hills and Dark City, as well as beneficiaries from the City’s housing database. pic.twitter.com/69ACDEPcQK
— Patricia de Lille (@PatriciaDeLille) May 22, 2018

De Lille updated her Twitter followers on the status of the building, and is seen in a series of photographs getting love from those present at the construction site.

We have informed the residents that so far, the construction team has completed 102 foundations, 94 floor levels and 70 concrete house frames.The teams are also putting up external walls, 53 of which have already been completed, and 16 roofs have also been installed. pic.twitter.com/ytuCW1CO8B
— Patricia de Lille (@PatriciaDeLille) May 22, 2018

De Lille’s hands-on involvement prompted praise from Twitter users, with the consensus being that she appears to be getting a lot done despite her newfound “ceremonial” role. If she’s trying to make the DA look bad, it’s working.

The aim is to complete 45 units by the end of June but many more units will be in an advanced stage by then and we can have beneficiaries – who have already been proceeded – move into their new homes as soon as they are completed. pic.twitter.com/Wq6SZBsyfn
— Patricia de Lille (@PatriciaDeLille) May 22, 2018