The Durban International Convention Centre (ICC) has generated revenues of R173 million in the past financial year which exceeded the prior year’s performance by R11 million.
According to the company, this was largely due to a significant growth in the number of events it hosted over the period, which resulted in a seven percent year-on-year growth in turnover, despite a stagnant economy and tough trading environment.
The company also showed a 30 percent year-on-year growth in profits, moving from R33 million in 2016 to R43 million this year, while it also received a clean, unqualified audit for the fourth consecutive year.
The conference centre added that a total of 11 024 people had been meaningfully employed as a result of its activities, while it has created and sustained more than 93 000 jobs over the past 11 years.
In a statement, it also estimated that the ICC had contributed R1 billion to indirect household income in 2017.
Durban ICC chief executive Lindiwe Rakharebe said: “Just as we have led the way in growing the meetings, conventions and exhibitions sector in South Africa, we look forward to making history in the next 20 years and beyond. Our heartfelt thanks go out to all stakeholders who have been a part of this positive growth trajectory.”
She said the conference facility has lived up to the prophetic words of Nelson Mandela when he said in his opening speech that in constructing the Durban ICC, the people of Durban had shown “foresight, determination and initiative” in creating a venue “that all South Africans can be proud of”.
“We are also extremely proud to have received our fourth consecutive clean, unqualified audit from the Auditor-General of South Africa this past year. It serves as a shining example of our uncompromising commitment to good governance and transparency in all our financial dealings.”
– Africa News Agency (ANA)


For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter. For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.