The Chamber of Mines has noted with great sadness the fall of ground incident at Sibanye-Stillwater’s Masakhane mine, Driefontein operations near Carletonville on the West Rand following a seismic event on Thursday.
The chamber extended its heartfelt sympathies to the families, friends, and colleagues of the seven employees who died of their injuries. The chamber wished a speedy recovery to the six employees currently recovering from their injuries in hospital, the chamber said in a statement.
“The chamber offers its appreciation for the work done by Sibanye-Stillwater, Mine Rescue Services rescue teams, the department of mineral resources (DMR), and all other stakeholders for their efforts in undertaking search and rescue activities.”
Addressing fall of ground incidents, particularly at deep-level mines, was an area that joint industry efforts had focused on most intensively over the past several years. This focus was reflected in the more than R150 million that the Mine Health and Safety Council (MHSC) had invested in falls of ground research, the chamber said.
Furthermore, through the MHSC, more than R250 million had been spent on research into the seismicity associated with deep-level mines. In addition, R40 million had been spent on fundamental and applied research and technology transfer. The research outcomes had led to new mine designs and methods. As a result, the number of fatalities associated with seismicity fell from 48 in 2003 to 14 in 2017.
Since 2017, the industry had noted with concern the increase in the number of rockbursts related to seismic activity while the number of rockfalls, which was typically the main cause of falls of ground, decreased. To better understand and address this concern, the mining industry occupational safety and health fall of ground task team had been established. Leading practices on rockbursts in particular were being developed and the findings would be shared across the industry.
The industry remained committed to achieve the collective aim – between mining companies, unions, and government – of zero harm, ensuring that that every single mining employee returned home, safe and unharmed, from work at the end of every day, the chamber said.
Earlier on Saturday, Sibanye-Stillwater said all 13 employees who were trapped underground after a seismic event at its Masakhane mine, Driefontein had now been recovered by mine rescue personnel.
“Regrettably, the last three employees who were recovered passed away from their injuries, bringing the total number of fatalities as a result of the seismic event, to seven,” Sibanye-Stillwater said in a statement.
The six employees who were successfully rescued were in a stable condition in hospital. The families of the employees had been contacted and were receiving necessary support and counselling.
“The board and management of Sibanye-Stillwater wishes to express its sincere condolences to friends and family of the deceased employees and those impacted by this tragic event. A thorough investigation by management and the department of mineral resources (DMR) and other stakeholders will be performed and all efforts will be made to ensure to prevent incidents of this nature occurring in future.
“We thank everyone involved in the rescue operations, especially the mine rescue teams and our own employees, who have worked tirelessly for the last two-and-a-half days to rescue our colleagues under extremely challenging conditions, Sibanye-Stillwater said.
– African News Agency (ANA)
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.