Springbok coach Rassie Erasmus has downplayed potential criticism that Siya Kolisi’s lukewarm form for the Stormers in Super Rugby doesn’t justify his elevation to the national captaincy.
The 26-year-old flanker, appointed to the role with much fanfare on Monday, has not been at his best in this year’s campaign though it must also be said that he’s played in a struggling side.
ALSO READ: Siya Kolisi becomes the Springboks’ first black Test captain
It’s definitely something Erasmus has taken notice of but it’s not worrying him.
“I’ve seen Siya go through some tough times this year as captain and as a player,” he said.
“But I know him as the guy who’s always playing well and is a great leader.”
Instead, Erasmus believes Kolisi possesses the same qualities as the legendary and versatile Bok flanker Andre Venter.
Andre Venter of South Africa in action during the Rugby World Cup Pool A match against Scotland played at Murrayfield, Edinburgh, Scotland. The game finished in a 46-29 win for South Africa. Mandatory Credit: David Rogers /Allsport
It’s hardly a flimsy comparison as the national coach knows Venter well – they were Springbok and Free State teammates and formed a brilliant loose trio with former Bok captain Gary Teichmann.
Venter played 66 Test for the Boks between 1996 and 2001.
“The way Siya’s playing currently, which is not so flashy, has impressed me,” said Erasmus
“He’s doing breakdown work on attack, he’s carrying the ball on attack and he’s cleaning out. He’s really doing the old blinside flanker job like Andre Venter did. It’s not flashy but it’s physical and it’s effective. It’s another string to his bow.”
That’s a very flattering statement.
Given that Kolisi generally plays in the No 6 jersey, which is considered more of an openside role, it will be interesting to see how Erasmus tweaks his skipper’s tactical role.
What is undeniable though is that the coaching staff are looking forward to his influence.
“I’m really excited about what Siya can offer us,” said Erasmus.