Trainer Joey Ramsden takes a very strong string of horses to Kenilworth tomorrow and can be expected to come away with more than one winner. Most of his brightest chances will be steered by jockey Donovan Dillon and it is not inconceivable that the pair will land the Jackpot on the day.
Arabian Air, Rock My Soul and A New Dawn are set to start as favourites for the Ramsden-Dillon combo in Races 5, 6 and 7. In Race 4, the first leg of the exotic, Dillon partners Sparkeling Fire, who is unlikely to be the shortest priced of Ramsden’s four runners but who could surprise.
The main event on the card, Race 7, a MR 96 Handicap over 1600m, sees Australian import A New Dawn have his second run after an absence from the racecourse of more than a year. In his comeback outing a month ago he galloped on steadily to finish fifth, just two lengths behind the in-form winner, Orakal.
That showing was enough to suggest that the beautifully bred colt is over his problems and ready to show the class hinted at as a juvenile.
He is a son of New Approach, an Epsom Derby winner, one-time top-rated racehorse in the world and a successful shuttle stallion for global megstud Darley.




The main threat to A New Dawn is probably the ultra-consistent New Caledonia, who seldom runs a bad race for trainer Geo Woodruff.
Dollar Tractor, a lightly weighted three-year-old from the Brett Crawford yard, could get into the picture on his peak run after a break, while six-year-old tough nut Mac De Lago seems to have settled well in his new Cape Town home and could run into the money with a 4kg apprentice allowance, courtesy of Louis Burke, giving him just 58.5kg to carry off a 101 merit rating.


Rock My Soul seems to be developing into a good stayer and can register his third win in 13 starts in Race 6, a MR 79 over 2000m. He won last time out over 2500m, while his previous victory was in a 1400m contest – demonstrating both stamina and speed.


Gimme One Night, trained by Brett Crawford, also has good recent form and is the obvious second floating banker for Quartet bets in Race 6.
The Ramsden-Dillon factor is also to the fore in Race 5, with Arabian Air.
This juvenile colt was an impressive winner on his racecourse debut a month ago and followed up with a close second to stable-mate Twist Of Fate, who contested one of the Grade 1 sprints at Scottsville at the weekend.








Would you like to place a bet
on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.