Employment contracts are very important in safeguarding the rights of both the employer and employee.
When entering into an agreement whereby one party agrees to offer services to another party, a valid contract that clearly stipulates the agreement has to be signed, George Herald reports.
READ MORE: Here’s what you should pay your domestic worker this year
“This is equally important for individuals who hire helpers around the house,” says Tertius Bossert, operations manager at FNB Law on Call, as he breaks down important information that a domestic worker’s contract should entail:

Job description: the employment contract must specify your employee’s job title and a description of the work that will be carried out. This is to ensure that both parties are on the same page in terms of what to expect and what is expected from each other.
Working hours: it is worth noting that working hours cannot be more than the 45 hours a week that is prescribed in the country’s labour laws, which can be broken down into nine hours a day for a five day work week or eight hours a day for a six day work week. Any additionally hours are considered overtime.
Remuneration: employers have to adhere to domestic worker’s minimum wages set by the department of labour, which clearly stipulate that domestic workers who work in urban areas earn a minimum of 13.05 per hour, whereas those working at non-urban areas earn a minimum of R11.89 per hour. These rates are, however, currently under review.
Leave days: statutory leave such as annual leave, sick leave, maternity leave and family responsibility leave should be stipulated in the employment contract. In cases where the employee needs to take leave, she will have to apply for leave with her employer.
Notice period: the contract needs to include the notice period in the event that one party wishes to terminate the contract. One-week notice is often given if the domestic worker is employed for one month or less, two weeks’ notice if employed for more than one month, but less than 12 months, and four weeks’ notice if employed for more than 12 months. The termination of employment should be in writing unless if the employee is unable to read or write. In this case, termination can also be verbal.

Bossert says: “It is always advisable to consult an attorney to assist in reviewing the contract to ensure that there are no mistakes.
“For consumers that cannot afford an attorney, there are service provides that offer consumers legal counsel such as labour matters, civil matters, criminal matters, reviewing contracts, drafting of a will at an affordable monthly premium. For example, FNB Law On Call offers these services for R75 a month.
“When agreeing to hire someone, it is important that there’s an agreement in writing. This is to protect both parties in the case of any disputes and contracts are there to serve this purpose which can be highly beneficial to both parties,” concludes Bossert.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.