A cyclist who participated in the Tour de Limpopo last week is in deep trouble for allegedly cycling on stolen bicycles, Bosveld Review reports.
According to information provided to Bosveld Review, the bicycles were insured for R130 000 and R120 000 respectively. They were also fitted with a Garmin GPS system, insured for R6 000.
READ MORE: Basson wins Tour Durban cycle race title
The father submitted an insurance claim, which was subsequently investigated by an agent of the insurance company, who traced the stolen bicycles to Polokwane.
One of the two bicycles which were reportedly stolen.
The bicycles were identified earlier in the race, but the cyclist was awarded the opportunity to finish the race before he was apprehended and charged with possession of possible stolen goods.
The arrest was effected by the anti-fraud and corruption unit of the department of transport and community safety in Limpopo, assisted by an agent of the insurance company.
The name of the cyclist is known to Bosveld Review, as well as the case number, but the man is yet to plead in court.
The Tour de Limpopo, organised by the Limpopo Tourism Agency and Cycling South Africa, forms part of the Union Cycliste Internationale (UCI) Africa Tour.
Cyclists raced not only to win the coveted yellow jersey, but to improve their individual and nations’ rankings on the international and African UCI ranking system.
Altogether, 64 international visitors representing 18 nationalities participated in the race, comprising teams of six persons each. Some 108 cyclists participated in the race.
The 19-year-old professional cyclist was apprehended after he reached the finishing point and met with his teammates at the Peter Mokaba Stadium. He was subsequently taken to the Polokwane Police Station. He appeared in court, and was released on bail. The investigation is ongoing.
Cycling South Africa’s general manager, Mike Bradley, said he was not present at the time, and was informed about the incident later. He added he had not yet received a full report, but regarded the incident as a personal matter between the cyclist and the insurance company.
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.