eThekwini Metro today said it will be supplying a provincial Auditor-General South Africa (AGSA) team with municipal security after one of the auditors received death threats while auditing the city’s books.
The alleged threats, received on Tuesday via phone, saw AGSA’s provincial office deciding to cease audits and withdraw its team on Wednesday. AGSA is a Chapter 9 institution mandated to audit government entities.
At a media briefing at city hall in the Durban city centre today, city manager Sipho Nzuza said the metro would be supplying municipal security for the auditors and confirmed that AGSA would also be supplying private security. He stressed that the audit would continue.
Speaking at the same briefing, mayor Zandile Gumede said that they learned the auditors were withdrawn on Wednesday. Gumede and Nzuza were out of the country on official business at the time but cut short their trip.
“I have instructed the head of security management, Mr Dumisani Bhengu, to develop a security plan for the AG staff members to ensure they are safeguarded during the auditing period.
“We are in constant communication with the AG office, we hope that by next week they will be back on site,” said Gumede.
KwaZulu-Natal’s department of cooperative governance and traditional affairs (Cogta) said this morning that it would “investigate the circumstances” that led to AGSA KwaZulu-Natal withdrawing its team.
“We will not allow this situation to be left unattended. This issue must be dealt with and must not repeat itself. Organs of state, chapter nine and independent institutions, should be allowed to do their work without fear or favour,” said Gumede.
She said that police and law enforcement agencies should prioritise the matter. The municipality was “fully committed to clean governance,” she said.
“I recently met with Auditor General, Kimi Makwetu, on 1 March 2018, and I committed to support the AG and to also strengthen our controls and oversight on governance issues.
“In addition, all senior municipal officials including the city manager have also confirmed that they had meetings with the office of the auditor general on 16 May 2018, and they committed to fully support the auditing process,” said Gumede.
The revelations were made public just a day after Makwetu released the 2016/2017 consolidated audit outcomes for municipalities, which showed serious regressions countrywide.
Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Auditor-General, Vincent Smith, said in a statement today that he was “extremely concerned” at reports of the death threats.
“The threats are a direct affront to good governance and to the spirit of the Constitution,” he said.
“It is both unfortunate and criminal to seek to intimidate AG’s officials and prevent them from doing their work. This matter must be escalated to the relevant law-enforcement agencies for proper investigation,” said Smith.
He called on the South African Police Service to “urgently” investigate the threats.
– African news Agency (ANA)
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.