In celebration of Miss South Africa’s 60th year jubilee milestone, the organisation is partnering with the Tomorrow Trust to ensure more young South Africans who lack the funds can go to school. 
“We believe Miss South Africa is an inspirational brand,” said Gareth Flusk of Sun International, on behalf of the Miss South Africa Organisation. 
“It promotes giving back and making a positive difference in our communities.
 “Traditionally, each Miss South Africa champions a social cause dear to her heart and this will continue to be part of the winner’s journey. 
“However, from 2018 onwards, the Legacy Initiative will provide an additional platform for all former Miss South Africa winners to work together as a meaningful force for good and jointly fundraise and increase awareness of a national objective, specifically focusing on education. 
“The future is tied to our young people, making education critical. Going forward, we will be reigning with purpose.”
Above: Rolene Strauss, Amy Kleinhans-Curd, Bokang Montjane, Tatum Keshwar, Kerishnie Naicker and Tansey Coetzee.
The project, run in partnership with Tomorrow Trust, will approach corporates, sponsors and supporters of the organisation to help disadvantaged young people who wish to attend and excel at a university level. 
Tomorrow Trust CEO James Donald said: “Our mission is to make a significant and sustainable contribution to SA youth through education, empowering them to reach their full potential and become meaningful contributors to a positive future and thriving SA. We are extremely excited to be partnering with the Miss South Africa Organisation to create the Legacy Initiative which will go a long way towards achieving our goals.
 “South Africa needs more of the inspirational young adults that Miss South Africa represents. Together we will give marginalised young people the support to emulate the best values of past and future Miss South Africa winners, to overcome their fears and develop into organised, hardworking and confident adults who succeed at university and in life.” 
Last night’s event, which was won by Tamaryn Green, also celebrated six decades of remarkable women, and nearly 40 former Miss South Africa title holders attended The Miss South Africa Diamond Jubilee. 
They included Miss Worlds Penny Coelen Rey (1958), Anneline Kriel Bacon (1974) and Rolene Strauss (2014), as well as Basetsana Makgalemele Kumalo (1994), Kerishnie Naicker (1997) and Bokang Montjane Tshabalala (2010), current Miss Universe Demi-Leigh Nel-Peters and Miss Universe 1978 Margaret Gardiner. 
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.