For quite a while Trip To Heaven has been called the “best sprinter never to win a Grade 1”.
He has not had the best of luck in that regard and when he finally did get home ahead of Mac De Lago to take the Grade 1 Gold Challenge over 1600m at Greyville, he lost it in the boardroom.
Sean Tarry’s charge runs in the Grade 1 Tsogo Sun Sprint over 1200m at Scottsville tomorrow and this could be his day.
His merit rating has finally been coming down and this time he will benefit from that drop as this R1-million race is a handicap. He has come down from a rating of 120 to 114, and the last time he raced o a merit rating that low was in November 2016 when he was on a winning roll. He comes into this race carrying 58.5kg, the lowest weight he has had on his back since January 2015.
“I haven’t run him in this race because he would had to give so much weight to his opposition,” said Tarry. “He is nicely handicapped this year and is very well.”
He will be ridden by regular jockey S’manga Khumalo and the fact he is drawn in the middle of the track is of little concern. He does tend to give a li le start to his rivals when coming out of the gate but by the time they reach Race 8, Khumalo will know where the better going might be and will be able to place his mount in the right lane.


The main threat is likely to come from Brett Crawford- trained Bold Respect. This three- year-old is very talented and has a record of three wins and five places from 10 starts.
We do know he is effective at Scottsville as he won the In Full Flight Stakes (Listed) over 1100m at this track in a far easier manner than the 0.50-length distance may convey.
Justin Snaith saddles another talented three-year-old in Kasimir and although he was well beaten in his last start it was his first attempt at 1400m and he probably did not stay. Others to consider are Attenborough, Al- ways In Charge and Naafer.
South African Fillies Sprint
Magical Wonderland is the runner to beat. She is a top-class filly and had a great comeback run over the course and distance in April when a 1.05-length fifth behind Sommerlied. She is 3kg better off with the winner and has a 1.5kg pull with second-placed Neptune’s Rain. The only concern is the No 18 draw, which could cause complications.
Green Plains has to be a big runner but she is also drawn wide. Others to consider are The Secret Is Out, Exquisite Touch, Live Life and Neptune’s Rain.


Tsogo Sun Gold Medallion
If one is looking for a banker in the Jackpot Cue The Music looks the one. He has won all three of his starts with ease, including the Grade 3 Godolphin Barb Stakes over this course and distance.
Horses do not get rated until they have had more than three runs but the handicappers keep an unofficial rating. On that basis Cue The Music is rated 107, Twist Of Fate 105, Traces and William The Silent 103 and Cirillo 102.
Joey Ramsden, trainer of Twist Of Fate, issued a warning: “Twist Of Fate was on the verge of being sold to Hong Kong last week, but it fell through. As a result his route into this race has been a little roundabout and far from ideal. But he is a smart, tough colt and should acquit himself well.”
William The Silent is a decent sort who won the SA Nursery and has more room for improvement.
Allan Robertson Championship
This race is for two-year-old fillies and looks to be the toughest of the four. However, there is a lot of confidence from the Mike de Kock yard about both Ghaalla and Dagmar, and from Sean Tarry about Celtic Sea.
“Ghaalla is putting up excellent work and we’re expecting a massive run,” said assistant Mathew de Kock.
“Things did not go Dagmar’s way last time and she should fare a lot better this time.”
Celtic Sea suffered interference when fourth in the Fillies Nursery at Turffontein and has a tendency to hang. However, Tarry has put a set of blinkers on her and is expecting a much better effort from her.




Ronnie’s Candy beat both Ghaalla and Celtic Sea and at 103, is the highest rated runner. However, these races often throw an upset and others to consider are Cankeepitsecret, Inverroche, Petra, Purest Bliss and Vivir.








Would you like to place a bet
on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.