A police constable was injured and a state vehicle set alight when protesters attacked police near Groblersdal, Limpopo.
Spokesman Lieutenant Colonel Moatshe Ngoepe police responded to Zaaiplaas community protesting and barricading the R579 road on Thursday.
”A group of community members from Zaaiplaas, went on the rampage following their protest actions which started on Tuesday by barricading the R579 road,” said Ngoepe.
The R579 road near Groblersdal in Limpopo, barricaded with rocks during a protest. Picture: SAPS
”Two police officers were performing their duties when a group turned against them, attacked them with various assortments of objects including stones. This led to a police constable sustaining some injuries. Reinforcements were sent to the area and the situation was normalised.”
Provincial commissioner Lieutenant General Nneke Ledwaba condemned the ”mushrooming tendencies” of attacking police members. He urged members to take appropriate and legal action to defend themselves in the wake of imminent attacks
“Community members are seriously warned that the police will take stern legal actions to defend themselves, any other person or property against these attacks,” said Ledwaba.
“Community members are expected to support and embrace police in their endeavor to fight crime rather than attack them. Those who participated in this heinous act are going to be hunted down until they are brought to book.”
Cases of malicious damage to property and assault are being investigated. No arrests have been made.
INFO: 

The Limpopo health ministry says criminal elements targeting health facilities are blocking people’s 24-hour access to clinics; 
According to the department, 24 cases have been recorded by the province’s public health centres since April last year; 
‘The department is calling on all community members to work together with the security committees to end crime at public health facilities,’ the department said; 
Limpopo health MEC Phophi Ramathuba announced in her 2017-18 budget speech that clinics should operate 24-hours either on a shift or on-call system; 
Department spokesperson Neil Shikwambane said they were doing everything possible to ensure that clinics operate 24 hours; and 
A nursing sister at Morapalala Clinic in Bolobedu, near Tzaneen, was robbed of her vehicle and a computer, while a security guard was mugged and his work pistol taken. 

– African News Agency (ANA)
For more news your way, follow The Citizen on Facebook and Twitter.