Rassie Erasmus on Saturday evening announced his first Springbok squad for the upcoming Tests against Wales and England.
It is a group that didn’t deliver too many surprises and can, actually, be met with widespread acceptance.
Here are four themes that have already emerged from Erasmus’ selections.
Thumbs up for an exciting Sharks trio
The inclusion of Lukhanyo Am, Sbu Nkosi and Makazole Mapimpi really should be celebrated.
Their franchise coach, Robert du Preez, has done a commendable job in granting them enough opportunities to grow this season and have rewarded him with fine performances.
Importantly for the Springboks, these three men provide the type of variety of skills international sides need.
Am is a complete package in midfield, a centre with vision, sound distribution, great running lines, hard defence and an underrated breakdown ability.
In fact, he’s arguably the best No 13 in the country.
Young Nkosi stands out because he’s willing to look for work when he doesn’t get the opportunity to showcase his attacking skills – a must in Test rugby where the going is slower for wingers.
And then there’s Mapimpi, that rare impact player who just always seems to find the tryline.
Boks don’t need an army of overseas-based players
Faf de Klerk has grown into a more rounded player in England. (Photo by Tony Marshall/Getty Images)
There’s always a lot of talk over the amount of South African plying their trade overseas and it remains a divisive issue.
Interestingly, Erasmus has always maintained that the local rugby community tends to overthink the issue as most of the best players in the country stay in South Africa.
His point has been proven to a large extent.
Only five players based in foreign lands have been picked out of a group of 43 and that says a lot.
Faf de Klerk simply had to be selected because he is the best scrumhalf the Boks have available, while Willie le Roux and Frans Steyn add value in terms of making up for a lack of exprience in the fullback position.
Steyn can also be a bolter in midfield.
Duane Vermeulen and Bismarck du Plessis are still playing good rugby despite being on the wrong side of 30 and won’t detract in any way from the Bok product.
However, would they have been picked if Malcolm Marx and Warren Whiteley had been available?
Be prepared for a potentially painful lack of experience at lock
Marvin Orie. (Photo by Gallo Images)
The good news is Franco Mostert and Pieter-Steph du Toit are a pretty formidable pair in the second row.
The bad news is the three men below them – Marvin Orie, RG Snyman and Jason Jenkins – have ZERO international caps between them.
Indeed, the injuries to Lood de Jager and Eben Eztebeth have disrupted a very delicate ecosystem in terms of national depth at lock.
Erasmus had no choice but to groom rookies in this position yet you have to wonder how vulnerable the Boks could be in the second row if one of Mostert or Du Toit are taken out of the equation.
Could the mobile, versatile Oupa Mohoje find his niche as modern day lock at international level?
Fun times at flyhalf
Handre Pollard. (Photo by Michael Steele/Getty Images)
If Handre Pollard is installed as Springbok captain – he’s very much in the running – then he’ll undoubtedly be the first-choice No 10.
But that shouldn’t make one lose sight of the fact that there’s some mouthwatering competition in this position.
Erasmus truly has picked the best flyhalves in the country.
Pollard is potentially the most complete package of the three men picked but Elton Jantjies provides guile when he’s on song and Robert du Preez is a reliable, rounded option.
Springbok squad:
Forwards: Nizaam Carr, Bismarck du Plessis, Dan du Preez, Jean-Luc du Preez, Pieter-Steph du Toit, Thomas du Toit, Jason Jenkins, Steven Kitshoff, Siya Kolisi, Wilco Louw, Frans Malherbe, Bongi Mbonambi, Oupa Mohoje, Franco Mostert, Beast Mtawarira, Ox Nche, Sikhumbuzo Notshe, Trevor Nyakane, Marvin Orie, Chiliboy Ralepelle, Kwagga Smith, RG Snyman, Akker van der Merwe, Duane Vermeulen.
Backs: Lukhanyo Am, Curwin Bosch, Damian de Allende, Faf de Klerk, Robert du Preez, Aphiwe Dyantyi, Andre Esterhuizen, Warrick Gelant, Travis Ismaiel, Elton Jantjies, Jesse Kriel, Willie le Roux, Makazole Mapimpi, Sbu Nkosi, Embrose Papier, Handre Pollard, Frans Steyn, Ivan van Zyl, Cameron Wright.