The four Grade 1 sprints at Scottsville have produced many champions over the years and this could happen again on Saturday.
The R1-million Tsogo Sun Sprint is the only handicap, the rest are all run on weight-for- age terms. The Allan Robertson Championship (Race 5) is for two- year-old fillies while the Tsogo Sun Gold Medallion (Race 6) is for all two-year-olds. Race 7, the South African Fillies Sprint is for fillies and mares. The three carry prize money of R750,000 and all four races are over 1200m.
The two-year-old features are of particular interest as they bring juveniles from all over the country together for the first time. It gives punters an indication as to where the better stock is lying. One also has to remember that Scottsville can be a tricky track and those who have raced there definitely have an advantage.
To add to the punting fever, the four races constitute the Jackpot for the day and there will also be a Pick 6 carryover of R1 million kicking off the pool and that is expected to reach R3.9 million.
But be warned – this card is not easy!
The Jackpot alone will be a real test and one can get an idea from the comments of some of the trainers that they are more “hopeful” than confident. Vaughan Marshall has a good record at this meetings and he has a runner in each of the four races.



He sends out Canukeepitsecret in Race 5 and told Viv Greybe: “She’s very, very well. I’m a little bit concerned about the draw but we are hoping that she can overcome that. She could be right there.”
Marshall also sends out Top Of The Class in the Gold Medallion. “He finished off his work this morning very well. I’m very pleased with him. Here again, he is drawn a little bit wide.”


Always In Charge is his runner in the Tsogo Sun Sprint: “He is very, very well. He is drawn in the middle of the field which is a good place to be. He is very well, possibly the best we’ve ever had him, so we are hopeful.’
However, he feels his best of the four comes up in the Fillies Sprint. “The Secret Is Out is well drawn and her work has been sensational. I think she is the best of our runners. I’m expecting a very big run from her.”


Candice Bass-Robinson sends out two runners in the Fillies Sprint. Live Life is the best handicapped filly in the eld but it is Magical Wonderland who tops the boards at 3-1.
“Magical Wonderland has a shocking draw – No 18 out of 19, but we are hopeful. We expect her to run well if she can overcome that draw.
Favourite for the Gold Medallion is Cue The Music from the Dennis Bosch yard. “He’s a very nice horse and should be competitive,” said Bosch.






Would you like to place a bet
on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.