Officers from Ekurhuleni Metro Police Department (EMPD) again confiscated homeless people’s belongings on Tuesday morning, reports Alberton Record.
On July 3, the Alberton Record published a story about 800 blankets being confiscated and burned by EMPD. During that time, no comment was received from Chief Sup Wilfred M Kgasago, who is also the spokesperson for EMPD, because he was on leave and nobody else could give comment.
According to Jacques Meyer, one of the homeless people who has lived in the field next to the Sun 1 Hotel in St Austell Street for more than three years, he received a letter from EMPD saying they have 24 hours to move their stuff.
ALSO READ: The homeless man in Bloem who bought a superbike
“Unfortunately I do not have the letter anymore. But that was on October 10 and we moved everything then but no one came,” he said. He also told the RECORD his Bible was taken and when he asked the officers if he could keep it, they told him he can collect it at their offices.
“I do not understand the reason behind this,” Jacques said.
He also said this is the second time EMPD officials have confiscated their belongings.
Hailey Plane also lives next to the hotel with Jacques and she said they took everything they had.
“I was walking from the Shell garage towards the field when we saw EMPD officials and approached them. We asked them why are they taking our things and where else should we go? But they were arrogant and did not reply,” said Hailey.
Jeanine Masters, who has lived there for seven months with her partner, Vincent Smith, said: “At the time I was at the Alberton Library and when I came back everything was gone. They took my medication as well. I have high blood pressure, asthma, and a chest infection.”
These four are more worried about 71-year-old Lawton Nichols, who is not well and is struggling daily.
“We have been looking out for uncle Lawton for the past two weeks. After all the rain of the weekend we already lost some of our stuff and now again it is taken away from us, our own goods that we gathered,” said Jeanine and Hailey.
“Organisations know our faces and due to people taking advantage of them in the past they will not just give us what we need a second or a third time. It gets more difficult and there is this image out in the world that we can just go and ask for new stuff, but it is not that easy. I don’t know what we are going to do now to get what we need like our toiletries, Jeanine’s medication, Bibles, blankets, sails for rainy weather and clothes,” Hailey said.
“My question is just why? Why take all that we have? We are not a problem. We just want to make a living with what we have,” said Jacques.
The manager of the Sun 1 Hotel has been so kind to them as he will warn them to take their stuff away before putting the sprinklers on. They will sometimes also get leftover food from him or the guests.
“Life is already tough, not just for us but for everyone so why come and take the little we have,” they said.
The Alberton Record is awaiting comment from the JMPD.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.