Democratic Alliance (DA) KwaZulu-Natal premier candidate Zwakele Mncwango has accused the African National Congress (ANC) of being divided on expropriating land under the Ingonyama Trust.
Mncwango said the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal and at national level hold contradicting views on expropriating the land under the trust – of which the amaZulu King Goodwill Zwelithini is the sole trustee.
The DA premier candidate was speaking to traditional leaders today in Nongoma, KwaZulu-Natal, where he said the ANC in the province says it will not expropriate land under the trust, but at national level the ANC says it will.
Mncwango said the misperceptions around the handling of the trust are not being helped by the ANC’s contradictory views on the matter.
“It is another sign that the failing ANC is a divided party and has no clear vision for the people of KwaZulu-Natal,” Mncwango said.
The premier candidate said the DA believes that inclusive consultations are key in dealing with the trust.
“The Ingonyama Trust Act of 1994 may only require amendments to achieve a meaningful outcome instead of wholesale expropriation without compensation.
“Our own discussions with amaKhosi show that amaKhosi recognise there may be difficulties with the trust and that they, along with His Majesty King Zwelethini, are committed to ensuring empowerment and upliftment for communities living on traditional land,” Mncwango said.
Should the DA be voted into government in KwaZulu-Natal, Mcwango said the party would meaningfully engage with King Zwelithini and traditional leaders in the province in an effort to find a way to protect communities living on communal land.
Mncwango added that these communities would be economically empowered by a DA-led provincial government through being granted title deeds for the land they live on.
He called for communities in the province to reject political parties who use the land issue “to drive emotions and [who should] concentrate on bringing real change to the lives of our people living in rural communities”.
Mncwango urged the DA to build strong partnerships with traditional leadership and not undermine them and not disrespect them.
“KwaZulu-Natal has the potential to provide for all, support all and be a home to all,” Mncwango said.
Mncwango said the ANC sought to expropriate land under the trust “so that they can divide it amongst themselves”.
The DA premier candidate said his party does not share the ANC and EFF’s view that the state should be the sole owner of the land and everyone else tenants on state land.
“This approach to land reform by the ANC continues to alienate traditional leaders who are critical stakeholders in ensuring that a process to transfer communal land to individual ownership is successful,” Mncwango said.
The wholesale expropriation of the Ingonyama Trust land by the state will do very little to improve the material and economic conditions of residents living in these areas, Mncwango added.
“If anything, it will perpetuate the cycle of poverty among the people as they will not be able to realise any economic value as ‘tenants of the state’.
“True economic empowerment for residents on Ingonyama Trust land will only become a reality once people are given the opportunity to own the land on which their families have lived for many generations.”
Meanwhile, it was reported on Tuesday that King Zwelithini has joined forces with minority representatives AfriForum, reportedly due to their mutual hatred for land expropriation without compensation.
(Compiled by Makhosandile Zulu)
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.