I like a braai just as much as most South Africans. In fact, l suspect I like it more than most of my countrymen.
I therefore consider myself quite an expert. And, no, this is not my ego talking. I know when I’m good at something, and braaiing is something I’m very good at.
When I recently was offered the opportunity to go to Singapore, I was very excited. Being a city person – as opposed to those who dream of an early retirement in some little village – visiting the third most densely populated country in the world was a dream come true.
The only little niggling thought was that I would be missing braai day back home.
But I quickly dismissed the niggle because there are another 364 braai days every year.
Known for its creative architecture, the city did not disappoint. Singapore defines thinking out of the box when it comes to utilising space and creating high-rises without choking the environment.
There’s greenery everywhere, as one would expect from a city where the weather is quite similar to Durban. And, of course, the world-class botanical garden is a complete urban forest.
The population density is exacerbated by the fact that Singapore is an island, so horizontal development is rather a challenge.
Underneath the city is an ever-growing labyrinth of retail space, transport hubs and even public spaces – and the plan is to extend this maze with cycling lanes and even residential areas.
I couldn’t resist spending a couple of hours in one of the underground shopping-malls – with three storeys of retail space taken up by some of the world’s most expensive brands. As it happened, I visited the mall last week Monday – on braai day.
While the Asian cuisine offers something for every palate, I did find myself salivating at the idea of a delicious lamb chop on the coals.
And then, right there in the bowels of a city almost 10 000 kilometres away, I discovered a man grilling a chicken flattie on real charcoal.
The little bit of smoke made my eyes water and I realised there and then: home is where the braai is.
Danie Toerien.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.