Divorce yourself from anything that no longer brings you sanity.
There really is no shame in walking away from relationships that no longer make you smile.
There is no plausible reason for women to be so desperate for the title of Mrs when it is a burden.
Children are robbed of a carefree childhood because mothers feel the need to stay in these unhealthy and uncaring relationships.
These very children have to assume the role of parents while the parents outdo each other at childish games.
Rehithile Katlego Matjane and Thobile Mbatha are examples of women who have been found guilty of the premeditated murders of their children.
There are many more women like this. Faceless women who are less affluent.
During the course of their court cases, there were allegations that the reasons behind the murders had to do with the infidelities of their husbands.
Let us never try to wash the blood off the hands of women who kill under the weight of staying in unhealthy relationships.
Society will always look down on a woman who walks away from a marriage without ever questioning why she made the decision to do so.
But women often put unnecessary and undue pressure on themselves to stay at a table where love is no longer served.
While “what will the neighbours say?” remains a huge factor in why many women remain in a marriage, staying alive should trump any opposing reason.
Women who feel that the only way to get back at their cheating spouses is by meting out their own form of justice on defenceless children, will never gain the sympathy of those looking on.
They will be harshly judged, more so than the men they claim forced them to commit such a heinous deed.
When a woman makes the decision to walk away from a situation that no longer puts a smile on her face, respect her enough to carry on with your daily business without having to ask and point fingers at a situation that you were never privy to.
Kekeletso Nakeli-Dhliwayo.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.