Commuters on the train which crashed into the back of a stationary train on Thursday evening, saw the crash coming and jumped from the moving train, Kempton Express reports.
The accident at Van Riebeeck Park Railway station left 320 people injured, of which 32 suffered serious but not critical injuries. There were no fatalities.
Shocked commuters on the scene told Kempton Express their train was stationary at the station since around 5pm due to mechanical issues.
“We were stuck at this station for a long time. After about 20 minutes some of the impatient commuters went to the train driver and asked him why there was such a long delay,” said one commuter who wished to remain anonymous.
The train driver apparently told the impatient commuters he was trying to call people from Metrorail and Prasa to come and resolve the issue, since there was no way the train could move.


“We heard an oncoming train hooting long before the crash. People who were hanging from the doors of the moving train saw there was going to be a crash and jumped screaming out of the moving train before the impact.”

Kempton Express spoke to the spokesperson for Ekurhuleni Disaster and Emergency Management Services, William Ntladi, on the scene.

“Emergency services of Ekurhuleni received a call at about 5.50pm about the two trains involved in the crash. On arrival we found that two Metrorail passenger trains were involved in a crash.
“We started with our on scene investigations and had various medical services on site that helped with patient assessment, treatment and transportation to various hospitals around Ekurhuleni,” said Ntladi.
A board of enquiry will be instituted soon to determine the root cause of the train accident.


This is according to Lillian Mofokeng, Gauteng Metrorail spokesperson.
The Metrorail train crew of both trains also received medical attention. The injured commuters were taken to various hospitals, including Tembisa, Kalafong, Zamokuhle, Arwyp, Tambo Memorial, Linksfield, Bertha Gxowa and Milpark hospitals.
Mofokeng said Metrorail train 0659, travelling from Johannesburg Park Station to Pretoria, collided from the rear end with train 0663, which was faulty and stationery at Van Riebeeck Park Station at 5.50pm.
“Management would like to thank the emergency services that were on site attending to the injured.
“Prasa will be working closely with all authorities. The cost of the accident is still unknown at this stage.”



For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.