Rehabilitation was said to be possible for 26-year-old Pennington resident Shane Andrew Jordaan, who pleaded guilty in court to a charge of distribution and possession of child pornography on August 24, reports South Coast Herald.
Jordaan’s attorney Paul Ramasar called their first witness on Friday. The witness, Pietermaritzburg-based clinical psychologist Dr Clive Willows, led with his report on Jordaan, whose grandmother and mother were both present in court.
ALSO READ: Man given 30 years for possession of child pornography
Abuse and health:
According to Dr Willows, it had emerged that Jordaan himself had been molested at the age of eight.
Jordaan also apparently suffers from Fanconi anaemia, the treatment for which caused him to go through puberty at a much younger age than normal.
Family history:
It was revealed in court that his mother and father had abandoned him and, in 1997, custody had been awarded to his grandmother, with whom he currently lives. His mother had left the country when he was two and is said to have become a sex worker.
When he was 18, Jordaan’s father had invited him to stay with him but this only lasted one month, after Jordaan confessed to his father that he had molested his half-brother.
Jordaan sought the help of a psychologist in 2011 but later became almost completely isolated from the outside world. He withdrew from society in general, becoming heavily reliant on his computer and the comfort of his own bedroom. It was only online that he could establish an identity for himself.
Online life:
Jordaan and his grandmother moved to Pennington from Pietermaritzburg, and he developed an online romantic relationship which continued for two years.
At the age of 13, he realised that he was sexually attracted to children and was especially attracted to the gentleness and unblemished innocence that young children display.
Dr Willows later highlighted that, if a proper course of action were taken, Jordaan could be rehabilitated and that he could control the need for sexual gratification which he gets from child pornography.
During his interaction with others online, Jordaan had become socially accepted and was referred to as a ‘lollycon’ – a term identifying someone attracted to young girls.
By this time, Jordaan had already been in contact with child porn distributors online and was in possession of numerous images and videos.
Preference and terms:
Jordaan was said to have often felt ‘disgusted’ when he was sent images depicting the ‘violent’ sexual abuse of minors and often reported these, supposedly to Interpol.
The state said Jordaan had previously explained that neither adult pornography nor child pornography was enough to satisfy his needs and he wanted to watch videos depicting child rape. While accepting that Jordaan had had no control over the content sent to him, the state asked why he had not deleted them if they had disgusted him so much. The court heard the images depicted torture.
Control:
Dr Willows explained that, if Jordaan were able to shift his focus towards more socially acceptable means of occupying his time, he could be rehabilitated and, over time, could learn to control his urges. The state then made reference to a 25-year study carried out by the Harvard Medical School, in which it was concluded that there was in fact no ‘cure’ for paedophilia.
Mental age and paedophilia:
Ramasar asked Dr Willows whether Jordaan could be considered a paedophile. Dr Willows answered ‘yes’, but taking into account Jordaan’s mental age (supposedly 10) he could not be classified a paedophile as the description applies only to those over the age of 16 years.
The second witness, senior social worker and project manager for the Teddy Bear Foundation for Abused Children Elizabeth Steenkamp, explained that the trauma experienced by victims often leaves them scarred for life. In some cases, victims can become offenders and that some also develop mental disorders.
The case was postponed to October 25, when it is understood that the defence will call a priest and a doctor to testify.
Jordaan remains out on bail.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.