Earlier today the 20-year-old, Nicholas Ninow, accused of raping a little girl in a Dros Silverton franchise last month appeared at the Pretoria Magistrate’s Court for his bail application.
Scores of people were outside the court first thing in the morning calling for the accused’s bail to be denied.
While the focus of the trial has mostly been on his identity and the outcome of today’s hearing, there are a few other things we noticed about today’s proceedings and the demonstrations outside.
President of the ANC Women’s League and Minister in the Presidency for Women Bathabile Dlamini was absent.
When asked about her whereabouts, the ANC’s national spokesperson, Pule Mabe had no answers.


ALSO READ: ‘Dros rapist’ in near tears during court appearance
The accused had a hoodie lying in wait to hide his face
Prior to the judge’s ruling that allowed the media a window to photograph the accused, before and shortly after the proceeding, the accused comfortably showed his face. According to reporters who were at the proceedings, he was able to make a quick escape and retrieve a hoodie which he then used to hide his face during the entire hearing.
Children showed up to form part of the crowd.
It is very rare that we see children as young as seven years old ever involved in any kind of protest action but today they were out in their numbers holding up signs featuring messages such as: “Don’t take my future away, I am a 7 year old! Down with the rapist”, “don’t rape our sisters”, and “don’t hurt us”.


The accused was not restrained
This fact has become a hot-button issue, prompting social media users to draw comparisons between various cases that make it seem as though restraints are reserved for black defendants only.


According to criminal lawyer Neo Madlala there are very few circumstances under which a defendant can appear in court without restraints before they are granted bail.
When former president Jacob Zuma’s son Duduzane appeared in the Randburg Magistrate’s Court earlier this year, he was controversially placed in leg irons despite not being a flight risk after voluntarily handing himself in to authorities.
ALSO READ: Justice minister says Duduzane Zuma should not have been put in leg irons
“If the accused is still a prisoner appearing before they have been granted bail, they would ordinarily be chained,” said Madlala.
Madlala could not list the exceptional circumstances under which defendants are allowed to appear without restraints.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.