Trainer Candice Dawson is going through golden run currently and she can provide another banker for punters at Turffontein tomorrow when D’ Arrivee (French for “of arrival”) lines up in Race 7, a MR 84 Handicap over 1450m on the Inside track.
This four-year-old son of Kahal has only raced eight times for one win and five places but has been put up against some decent opposition.
His last run was over this course and distance where he found loads of being support but was just touched off by Pietro Mascagni, going down by a head.
It was a great eff ort from the winner who was giving D’ Arrivee 9kg, but if one considers that Mike de Kock’s charge is second favourite for the WSB Grand Heritage on Saturday it was a most encouraging effort from the Dawson-trained gelding.
He carries 3kg more in this race but the opposition looks a lot weaker and he should be good enough to win this. Warren Kennedy, who rode D’ Arrivee last time, is back in the irons and has been complaining of late that he is getting touched off a touch too o en.
However, he had a lot to smile about on Saturday when he kept Captain Aldo going to win the Grade 2 Joburg Spring Challenge over this track and trip so perhaps the luck has turned for him.
Make Your Move could be the main threat. Ormond Ferraris is still teaching the youngsters a thing or two and seems to have a reasonable three-year-old with this son of Var.
He ran well when second behind Strawberry Pavlova last time and should be a nice horse with whom to take Swingers.
One runner who will go off at a decent price is Classify.
This seven-year-old has lost form but his merit rating has fallen from 91 to 78 and that appears to have made a difference.
In his last start, which was in the race won by Pietro Mascagni, Dorrie Sham’s runner was in last place turning for home, more than 12 lengths behind the leader, after failing to overcome the widest draw of all, but finished like rocket to end up 4.75 lengths behind the winner.
His time for the fi nal 400m was 23.8 second as opposed to the 24.2 seconds of D’ Arrivee so do not leave Classify out of Quartets and Trifectas.
SA Nursery (Grade 2) winner William The Silent makes his comeback in Race 6, an Assessment Plate over 1000m.
He was gelded during his winter break so might need the run. Shufoog, on the other hand, has had a comeback run and although she missed the break and was well beaten, could make amends in this event.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.
Would you like to place a bet
on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.