Dignitaries and the Molewa family gathered at the memorial service for Environmental Affairs Minister Edna Molewa, who died last week after a short illness at the age of 61.
The memorial was held at the Tshwane events centre today.
Arts and Culture Minister Nathi Mthethwa, Water and Sanitation Minister Gugile Nkwinti, former deputy chief justice Dikgang Moseneke, Minister of Labour Mildred Oliphant and Communcations Minister Nomvula Mokonyane were among the dignitaries present.
Tributes for Molewa were offered by Rev M Motolla on behalf of the Leganyane Zion Christian Church, socio-economic development partner Radi van Zyl, colleague Mthabo Leeto, Duma Nkosi, and CEO of Wildlife Fund South Africa Morne du Plessis.
ANC women’s league leader and Basic Education Minister Angie Motshekga spoke about her memories of Molewa in the ANC women’s league.
“She was indeed a great leader and as the president said, she was a damn hard worker,” Motshekga said.
“It was fun to be around Comrade Edna. We would drive and she knew when we travelled, she would have to hand over the keys. We would play our music to the top, laugh and really be big girls.”
Motshekga said she missed Molewa’s cooking as she cooked very well.  “We’ve enjoyed warmth and the fire she brought.”
Minister of Higher Education Naledi Pandor delivered the keynote address and shared her fond memories of the late minister.
Pandor described Molewa as someone without any controversies, like many others.  Someone with a passion that “one rarely sees”.
“Comrade Edna lived at a time in our movement when the ANC is re-asserting it’s values.”
She mentioned Molewa had done great service and that she will never be forgotten.
Molewa was an ANC NEC and NWC member as well as cabinet minister at the time of her passing.
The presidency has confirmed she will receive an official state funeral.
Another memorial will be held at the Brits Rugby stadium tomorrow and the official funeral will be on Saturday, October 6. The funeral will start at 8am at the Tshwane events center.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.