Adopting an animal is a bit like a child – they need to be well matched with surroundings that suit their personalities and demeanours. With the help of the Sandton SPCA, this is easily achieved, since bonding with a prospective dog before adopting is allowed and encouraged.
See the beautiful dogs up for adoption at the Sandton SPCA this week.
Rudy is a dog lover’s dream.
Rudy is a 2-year-old German Shepherd crossbreed that has been described by his keepers as the “total package”. Rudy is smart and will be easily trained, naturally athletic, friendly, playful, and loving. This dog will be well suited to a house with a garden (a pool would be an added bonus). The SPCA has noted that he is not good with cats.
Mishy has really come out of her shell and emerged as a great companion.
Mishy started out as a scared dog, but has since emerged as a great furry companion. With a lot of love and space to run free, Mishy has turned into a friendly, sociable, curious, and easy-going pupper. Her caretakers have noted that she is good with other dogs, and would do well with a friend or two in her new furever home.
Lex is an energetic pup, full of life and love.
Lex is a real diamond in the rough case. He is energetic and loving, but needs a patient human companion to train him and show him some doggy manners. With that being said, Lex is a sweet dog that has shown no signs of aggression towards any dogs – that would be sure to brighten anyone’s day. He is also quite young and definitely a unique-looking dog.
Digby is a newcomer that is smart and quick on his feet.
Handsome and smart, this Malinois cross breed is a beautiful soul that was found as a stray and never claimed. In his short time at the SPCA, he has shown his eagerness to bond with humans, despite his challenging past. Digby deserves to have a change of fate in the form of a home to call his own.
Jessie may be older, but certainly doesn’t act like it.
Meet Jessie, an older dog with a youthful and vibrant personality. Jessie’s owners had to surrender her after falling on hard times, but she has experienced love throughout her life and deserves to retire comfortably. Small in size and good with both cats and dogs, Jessie should be an easy dog to the home, but because of her age, many might be hesitant. However, older dogs make fantastic companions, and Jessie still has a lot of life to live and love to give.
For more information on the Sandton SPCA’s adoption procedure, visit their website on http://www.sandtonspca.org.za/adopt-a-pet/ , contact them by phoning 011 444 7730, or send an email to adopt@sandtonspca.org.za.
The Sandton SPCA is also in dire need of dog and cat blankets. Donations can be dropped off at the Sandton SPCA, situated at 350 9th Street, Marlboro Gardens.
Alternatively, blankets can be purchased via Takealot.com, who will deliver to the Sandton SPCA. Place your order by clicking on the following link: https://www.takealot.com/pets/blankets-6964?sort=BestSelling+Descending&rows=20&start=0&filter=Available%3Atrue

For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.