EFF National Chairperson advocate Dali Mpofu took to Twitter on Wednesday morning to invite users to “close your eyes for 2 minutes and imagine where the country would be if there was no EFF!”
Mpofu then lists a series of “clues” comprising issues that he believes would not have come to the fore without the work of his party.
According to the advocate, the EFF has shaped the country’s direction when it comes to parliament, Nkandla, corruption, Guptas, the state capture report, land, metros, Zuma, Zondo, and Nene.


While the list does appear to be a lot to take credit for, political analysts have noted what appears to be the significant impact the party has had on the SA political landscape, particularly considering the fact that they only have 6% of the vote.
“They have occupied a space that traditionally has belonged to the ANC, which is the politics of the left,” said political analyst Prince Mashele on Talk Radio 702.
Another political analyst Sithembile Mbete noted the party’s impact on SA’s discourse regarding land.
“The EFF has made this link consistently since 2013 between land and dignity, between land and personhood, [and now we are seeing] the ANC adopt that rhetoric in a way that it arguably never has,” he said.
READ MORE: Dali Mpofu suggests EFF will boycott Obama’s Mandela lecture
Journalist Max du Preez, on the other hand, wrote that he believes the EFFs impact is overstated and that the perception that they have shifted SA politics “is more a reaction to the EFFs reckless populism and clever use of symbolism and theatrics”
But while many EFF supporters backed Mpofu on his claims, they were also met with their fair share of derision.
Twitter users voiced criticism ranging from the suggestion that the EFF appeared to be “claiming glory when your agents were part of the corruption too” to accusations that the party is responsible for “inciting farm murders, illegal occupation of land, increase in anarchy and violence, intimidation of journalists, sowing racial division”.
Another user told Mpofu “not to act holy” as he too was once part of the ANC, and suggested that the EFF would be “worse” than the ANC if they gained power.








For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.