It’s a 45 minute car ride up the West Coast from Cape Town to visit Sabine Planer’s private training centre Rondeberg.
The spacious facility has as-sets most other trainers can only dream of: a 1800m grass track, a 1000m light sand track and an all-weather track, as well as a swimming pool and hot walker.
Trainer Andre Nel meets and greets very early on a blustery Fri-day, and we go off to see his horses work, accompanied by jockeys Bernard Fayd’Herbe, Anthony An-drews, and Sihle Cele.
“The biggest bonus working out of here is that we’ve got the beach on our doorstep so the horses get a chance to go to the sea and walk in the cold Atlantic every day.
It’s good for the mind and the body,” says Nel about the impressive setup.
The stable has got off to a flying start this season, with 15 winners already, including undefeated three-year-old colt Pleasedtomeetyou in the Listed Sophomore Sprint, and improving filly Love To Boogie in the Grade 3 Diana Stakes.
After his string generally worked very impressively, we sat down with a coffee to discuss his plans for the more prominent in-mates over the coming months.
PLEASEDTOMEETYOU: He’s done nothing wrong, and will next run in the Cape Classic on the 27th.
After that we will decide which route to go with him – sprints or Guineas.
He is working very well, and we have high hopes for him either way.
HEAD HONCHO: He won a Grade 3 in the KZN season, and we are hoping to get him into the Sun Met.
He will next appear in a Pinnacle Stakes, and then probably the Premier Trophy.
HEMMINGWAY: He has done very well, and is just below top class. A real trier, and he will next run in the Cape Merchants, where the handicap terms will suit him.
LOVE TO BOOGIE: Her main aim for the season will be the Paddock Stakes. She will run in a Pinnacle Stakes leading into that Grade 1. Then the Majorca Stakes on Sun Met day.
NGAGA: She was doing very well, but picked up a niggle recently. That has set her back, and best case scenario she will reap-pear in the Victress Stakes in December.
SILVER DE LANGE: Decent stayer, but he was stuck in KZN due to vaccination issues. We have to decide whether to leave him there or bring to Cape Town for the summer.
VIKRAM: Nice horse that we haven’t seen the best of yet. Looking at the CTS 1600 on Met day, but he will need to start winning soon if he is to qualify.
BAD BOY PLAYS: Unraced three-year-old final foal of Bad Girl Runs. Highly promising, and lots of ability, but a slow mature and we won’t be rushing him.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.
Would you like to place a bet
on the horses? Click here to get started in 3 easy steps.