I must admit that I don’t know much about the inner workings of the Post Office. In fact, I don’t make regular use of their services and, when I do, it is usually a quick and painless exercise.
Note the word “usually”.
Last Tuesday, however, was a rather unusual day as a close relative and I both had somewhat bizarre encounters with the Post Office.
The relative, let’s call him Mister Lucky – pun intended – had won himself a little Christmas shopping bonanza on the lottery. Not millions, not hundreds of thousands, but a few sticks that would come in very handy over the festive period. Needless to say, he was on cloud nine.
The main post office in his area has been housed in the same building for what seems an eternity. In fact, it may even have been built before the introduction of electricity, because there is none inside the building.
Apparently this has been the state of affairs since the plugs “went boom”. Judging by the soot which extends all the way to the ceiling, it must have been one helluva boom.
Coming down to earth faster than a pole dancer with sweaty palms, Mister Lucky went off to the next closest post office. There he was told to wait because they had “run out of money”.
According to Mister Lucky, it was like being hit in the face by a water-balloon.
But still he refused to get his spirit dampened and waited patiently until – after an hour – he went home with his stash of R50 notes. Yes. That was the only denomination available.
Not a tale of prosperity. My story pales in comparison.
Last week Tuesday I went to the local post office across the road from the office. Being somewhat of a traditionalist, I do still write letters, with a real pen, and mail them.
Imagine my shock when the young gentleman behind the counter explained that they had run out of stamps.
At least I’ll be saving some money, because this year I’ll e-mail everyone their Christmas presents.
The cherry on top, of course, is that last Tuesday was, indeed, World Post Day.
Danie Toerien.
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.