For years, the public has followed the progress in Gugu Keswa’s case to get former president Nelson Mandela’s grandson Mbuso to cough up child maintenance for their now five-year-old child, to no avail.
Mbuso was arrested in early 2017 for defaulting on payments and he later demanded a paternity test for the child, even though his family had been making sporadic contributions towards the child’s living expenses over the years.
According to IOL, the test revealed that Mbuso is the father of Keswa’s child but no resolution has been reached on the maintenance issue thus far.
So Keswa has taken up activism in the fight against defaulting dads alongside child maintenance activist and founder of Child Maintenance Difficulties South Africa (CMDSA) Felicity Guest.
ALSO READ: Mandela grandson splurges R90k on designer labels, fails to pay maintenance
The pair have been hosting a series of workshops to raise awareness about the lack of maintenance and the avenues available to mothers in need of financial assistance from the fathers of their children.
Keswa recently retold her tale to Sunday Times and took to Facebook to explain why she did what she did. In a caption accompanying a screenshot of the article, she wrote, “coming out with my story was not easy.. I had to overcome my fears of people’s judgements, I had to overcome the notion that’s known so well to women where we are told to just leave it, just keep quiet and do it on your own, my fears of facing court its taken a lot of persistence.”
Gugu Keswa explains why she went public with her maintenance struggle against Mbuso Mandela | Image: Facebook
She added that she feels as though a burden has been lifted by having her story told.
“So I lost some friends, some people don’t like me – none of it matters, the truth shall set you free…wen asked why all of this I say “I did it for my daughter.” .. I told my story.. Wats your story?,” added Keswa.
She went on to urge mothers who have been struggling with defaulting dads to follow a Facebook page started by herself and a guest, titled Child Maintenance Difficulties in SA, and to send their stories to herself and “Guest” so that they can assist in working towards a solution.
“Let’s help solve 100 000 unsolved maintenance stories and more… .. #break the silence #own your throne…details of march will follow… Tata madiba long live your spirit I am honoured to raise your great granddaughter and I will take care of her as I have been entrusted with this duty. I have taken #responsibilty…. Long live #tata… #amandla,” wrote Keswa.
Guest also shared the article, stating that maintenance battles between parents should become more widely covered.
READ NEXT: Mandela grandchild failed to support child despite R4m inheritance
For more news your way, download The Citizen’s app for iOS and Android.